the digital computer. In retrospect, this would not be a bad patent to own. After
years of litigation, the courts decided that the Eckert-Mauchley patent was invalid
and that John Atanasoff invented the digital computer, even though he never
patented it, effectively putting the invention in the public domain.

18

INTRODUCTION

CHAP. 1

While Eckert and Mauchley were working on the EDVAC, one of the people
involved in the ENIAC project, John von Neumann, went to Princeton’s Institute of
Advanced Studies to build his own version of the EDVAC, the IAS machine. Von
Neumann was a genius in the same league as Leonardo Da Vinci. He spoke many
languages, was an expert in the physical sciences and mathematics, and had total
recall of everything he ever heard, saw, or read. He was able to quote verbatim
from memory the text of books he had read years earlier. At the time he became
interested in computers, he was already the most eminent mathematician in the
world.
It was soon apparent to him that programming computers with huge numbers
of switches and cables was slow, tedious, and inflexible. He came to realize that
the program could be represented in digital form in the computer’s memory, along
with the data. He also saw that the clumsy serial decimal arithmetic used by the
ENIAC, with each digit represented by 10 vacuum tubes (1 on and 9 off) could be
replaced by using parallel binary arithmetic, something Atanasoff had realized
years earlier.
The basic design, which he first described, is now known as a von Neumann
machine. It was used in the EDSAC, the first stored-program computer, and even
now, more than half a century later, is still the basis for nearly all digital computers. This design, and the IAS machine, built in collaboration with Herman
Goldstine, has had such an enormous influence that it is worth describing briefly.
Although Von Neumann’s name is always attached to this design, Goldstine and
others made major contributions to it as well. A sketch of the architecture is given
in Fig. 1-5.
Memory

Control
unit

Arithmetic
logic unit

Input

Output
Accumulator

Figure 1-5. The original von Neumann machine.

The von Neumann machine had five basic parts: the memory, the arithmetic
logic unit, the control unit, and the input and output equipment. The memory consisted of 4096 words, a word holding 40 bits, each a 0 or a 1. Each word held either two 20-bit instructions or a 40-bit signed integer. The instructions had 8 bits
devoted to telling the instruction type and 12 bits for specifying one of the 4096

SEC. 1.2

MILESTONES IN COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE

19

memory words. Together, the arithmetic logic unit and the control unit formed the
‘‘brain’’ of the computer. In modern computers they are combined onto a single
chip called the CPU (Central Processing Unit).
Inside the arithmetic logic unit was a special internal 40-bit register called the
accumulator. A typical instruction added a word of memory to the accumulator
or stored the contents of the accumulator in memory. The machine did not have
floating-point arithmetic because von Neumann felt that any competent mathematician ought to be able to keep track of the decimal point (actually the binary point)
in his or her head.
At about the same time von Neumann was building the IAS machine, researchers at M.I.T. were also building a computer. Unlike IAS, ENIAC and other
machines of its type, which had long word lengths and were intended for heavy
number crunching, the M.I.T. machine, the Whirlwind I, had a 16-bit word and was
designed for real-time control. This project led to the invention of the magnetic
core memory by Jay Forrester, and then eventually to the first commercial
minicomputer.
While all this was going on, IBM was a small company engaged in the business of producing card punches and mechanical card-sorting machines. Although
IBM had provided some of Aiken’s financing, it was not terribly interested in computers until it produced the 701 in 1953, long after Eckert and Mauchley’s company was number one in the commercial market with its UNIVAC computer. The
701 had 2048 36-bit words, with two instructions per word. It was the first in a
series of scientific machines that came to dominate the industry within a decade.
Three years later came the 704, which initially had 4096 words of core memory,
36-bit instructions, and a new innovation, floating-point hardware. In 1958, IBM
began production of its last vacuum-tube machine, the 709, which was basically a
beefed-up 704.

1.2.3 The Second Generation—Transistors (1955–1965)
The transistor was invented at Bell Labs in 1948 by John Bardeen, Walter Brattain, and William Shockley, for which they were awarded the 1956 Nobel Prize in
physics. Within 10 years the transistor revolutionized computers, and by the late
1950s, vacuum tube computers were obsolete. The first transistorized computer
was built at M.I.T.’s Lincoln Laboratory, a 16-bit machine along the lines of the
Whirlwind I. It was called the TX-0 (Transistorized eXperimental computer 0)
and was merely intended as a device to test the much fancier TX-2.
The TX-2 never amounted to much, but one of the engineers working at the
Laboratory, Kenneth Olsen, formed a company, Digital Equipment Corporation
(DEC), in 1957 to manufacture a commercial machine much like the TX-0. It was
four years before this machine, the PDP-1, appeared, primarily because the venture
capitalists who funded DEC firmly believed that there was no market for computers. After all, T.J. Watson, former president of IBM, once said that the world

20

INTRODUCTION

CHAP. 1
