solution to the memory-addressing problem, as computing systems would soon require the ability to address more than 232 (4,294,967,296) bytes of memory. In a
few more years computers with 64-bit addresses would appear on the scene.
The minicomputer world also took a big step forward in the third generation
with DEC’s introduction of the PDP-11 series, a 16-bit successor to the PDP-8. In
many ways, the PDP-11 series was like a little brother to the 360 series just as the
PDP-1 was like a little brother to the 7094. Both the 360 and PDP-11 had
word-oriented registers and a byte-oriented memory and both came in a range
spanning a considerable price/performance ratio. The PDP-11 was enormously
successful, especially at universities, and continued DEC’s lead over the other
minicomputer manufacturers.

1.2.5 The Fourth Generation—Very Large Scale Integration (1980–?)
By the 1980s, VLSI (Very Large Scale Integration) had made it possible to
put first tens of thousands, then hundreds of thousands, and finally millions of transistors on a single chip. This development soon led to smaller and faster computers. Before the PDP-1, computers were so big and expensive that companies
and universities had to have special departments called computer centers to run
them. With the advent of the minicomputer, a department could buy its own computer. By 1980, prices had dropped so low that it was feasible for a single individual to have his or her own computer. The personal computer era had begun.
Personal computers were used in a very different way than large computers.
They were used for word processing, spreadsheets, and numerous highly interactive applications (such as games) that the larger computers could not handle well.

24

INTRODUCTION

CHAP. 1

The first personal computers were usually sold as kits. Each kit contained a
printed circuit board, a bunch of chips, typically including an Intel 8080, some
cables, a power supply, and perhaps an 8-inch floppy disk. Putting the parts together to make a computer was up to the purchaser. Software was not supplied. If
you wanted any, you wrote your own. Later, the CP/M operating system, written
by Gary Kildall, became popular on 8080s. It was a true (floppy) disk operating
system, with a file system, and user commands typed in from the keyboard to a
command processor (shell).
Another early personal computer was the Apple and later the Apple II, designed by Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak in the proverbial garage. This machine
was enormously popular with home users and at schools and made Apple a serious
player almost overnight.
After much deliberating and observing what other companies were doing,
IBM, then the dominant force in the computer industry, finally decided it wanted to
get into the personal computer business. Rather than design the entire machine
from scratch, using only IBM parts, made from IBM transistors, made from IBM
sand, which would have taken far too long, IBM did something quite uncharacteristic. It gave an IBM executive, Philip Estridge, a large bag of money and told
him to go build a personal computer far from the meddling bureaucrats at corporate
headquarters in Armonk, NY. Estridge, working 2000 km away in Boca Raton,
Florida, chose the Intel 8088 as his CPU, and built the IBM Personal Computer
from commercial components. It was introduced in 1981 and instantly became the
best-selling computer in history. When the PC hit 30, a number of articles about
its history were published, including those by Bradley (2011), Goth (2011), Bride
(2011), and Singh (2011).
IBM also did something uncharacteristic that it would later come to regret.
Rather than keeping the design of the machine totally secret (or at least, guarded
by a gigantic and impenetrable wall of patents), as it normally did, it published the
complete plans, including all the circuit diagrams, in a book that it sold for $49.
The idea was to make it possible for other companies to make plug-in boards for
the IBM PC, to increase its flexibility and popularity. Unfortunately for IBM,
since the design was now completely public and all the parts were easily available
from commercial vendors, numerous other companies began making clones of the
PC, often for far less money than IBM was charging. Thus, an entire industry
started.
Although other companies made personal computers using non-Intel CPUs, including Commodore, Apple, and Atari, the momentum of the IBM PC industry
was so large that the others were steamrollered. Only a few survived, and these
were in niche markets.
One that did survive, although barely, was the Apple Macintosh. The Macintosh was introduced in 1984 as the successor to the ill-fated Apple Lisa, which was
the first computer to come with a GUI (Graphical User Interface), similar to the
now-popular Windows interface. The Lisa failed because it was too expensive, but

SEC. 1.2

MILESTONES IN COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE

25

the lower-priced Macintosh introduced a year later was a huge success and inspired
love and passion among its many admirers.
The early personal computer market also led to the then-unheard of desire for
portable computers. At that time, a portable computer made as much sense as a
portable refrigerator does now. The first true portable personal computer was the
Osborne-1, which at 11 kg was more of a luggable computer than a portable computer. Still, it proved that portables were possible. The Osborne-1 was a modest
commercial success, but a year later Compaq brought out its first portable IBM PC
clone and was quickly established as the leader in the market for portable computers.
The initial version of the IBM PC came equipped with the MS-DOS operating
system supplied by the then-tiny Microsoft Corporation. As Intel was able to produce increasingly powerful CPUs, IBM and Microsoft were able to develop a successor to MS-DOS called OS/2, which featured a graphical user interface, similar to
that of the Apple Macintosh. Meanwhile, Microsoft also developed its own operating system, Windows, which ran on top of MS-DOS, just in case OS/2 did not catch
on. To make a long story short, OS/2 did not catch on, IBM and Microsoft had a
big and extremely public falling out, and Microsoft went on to make Windows a
huge success. How tiny Intel and even tinier Microsoft managed to dethrone IBM,
one of the biggest, richest, and most powerful corporations in the history of the
world, is a parable no doubt related in great detail in business schools around the
globe.
With the success of the 8088 in hand, Intel went on to make bigger and better
versions of it. Particularly noteworthy was the 80386, released in 1985, which was
a 32-bit CPU. This was followed by a souped-up version, naturally called the
80486. Subsequent versions went by the names Pentium and Core. These chips
are used in nearly all modern PCs. The generic name many people use to describe
the architecture of these processors is x86. The compatible chips manufactured by
AMD are also called x86s.
By the mid-1980s, a new development called RISC (discussed in Chap. 2)
began to take over, replacing complicated (CISC) architectures with much simpler
(but faster) ones. In the 1990s, superscalar CPUs began to appear. These machines could execute multiple instructions at the same time, often in a different
order than they appeared in the program. We will introduce the concepts of CISC,
RISC, and superscalar in Chap. 2 and discuss them at length throughout this book.
Also in the mid-1980s, Ross Freeman with his colleagues at Xilinx developed
