Also, and perhaps most important, these platforms are carefully optimized for a
few application domains: highly interactive applications with 3D graphics and multimedia output. Everything else is secondary. These hardware and software restrictions, lack of extensibility, small memories, absence of a high-resolution monitor,
and small (or sometime absent) hard disk make it possible to build and sell these
machines more cheaply than personal computers. Despite these restrictions, millions of these devices have been sold and their numbers are growing all the time.

36

INTRODUCTION

CHAP. 1

Mobile computers have the added requirement that they use as little energy as
possible to perform their tasks. The less energy they use the longer their battery
will last. This is a challenging design task because mobile platforms such as tablets
and smartphones must be frugal in their energy use, but at the same time, users of
these devices expect high-performance capabilities, such as 3D graphics, high-definition multimedia processing, and gaming.

1.3.6 Personal Computers
Next, we come to the personal computers that most people think of when they
hear the term ‘‘computer.’’ These include desktop and notebook models. They
usually come with a few gigabytes of memory, a hard disk holding up to terabytes
of data, a CD-ROM/DVD/Blu-ray drive, sound card, network interface,
high-resolution monitor, and other peripherals. They have elaborate operating systems, many expansion options, and a huge range of available software.
The heart of every personal computer is a printed circuit board at the bottom or
side of the case. It usually contains the CPU, memory, various I/O devices (such as
a sound chip and possibly a modem), as well as interfaces to the keyboard, mouse,
disk, network, etc., and some expansion slots. A photo of one of these circuit
boards is given in Fig. 1-10.
Notebook computers are basically PCs in a smaller package. They use the
same hardware components, but manufactured in smaller sizes. They also run the
same software as desktop PCs. Since most readers are probably quite familiar with
notebook and personal computers, additional introductory material is hardly needed.
Yet another variant on this theme is the tablet computer, such as the popular
iPad. These devices are just normal PCs in a smaller package, with a solid-state
disk instead of a rotating hard disk, a touch screen, and a different CPU than the
x86. But from an architectural perspective, tablets are just notebooks with a different form factor.

1.3.7 Servers
Beefed-up personal computers or workstations are often used as network servers, both for local area networks (typically within a single company), and for the
Internet. These come in single-processor and multiple-processor configurations,
and have gigabytes of memory, terabytes of hard disk space, and high-speed networking capability. Some of them can handle thousands of transactions per second.
Architecturally, however, a single-processor server is not really very different
from a single-processor personal computer. It is just faster, bigger, and has more
disk space and possibly a faster network connection. Servers run the same operating systems as personal computers, typically some flavor of UNIX or Windows.

SEC. 1.3

THE COMPUTER ZOO

37

Figure 1-10. A printed circuit board is at the heart of every personal computer.
This one is the Intel DQ67SW board. © 2011 Intel Corporation. Used by permission.

Clusters
Owing to almost continuous improvements in the price/performance ratio of
servers, in recent years system designers have begun connecting large numbers of
them together to form clusters. They consist of standard server-class systems connected by gigabit/sec networks and running special software that allow all the machines to work together on a single problem, often in business, science or engineering. Normally, they are what are called COTS (Commodity Off The Shelf) computers that anyone can buy from a PC vendor. The main addition is high-speed networking, but sometimes that is also a standard commercial network card, too.
Large clusters are typically housed in special-purpose rooms or buildings called data centers. Data centers can scale quite large, from a handful of machines to
100,000 or more of them. Usually, the amount of money available is the limiting
factor. Owing to their low component price, individual companies can now own
such machines for internal use. Many people use the terms ‘‘cluster’’ and ‘‘data
center’’ interchangeably although technically the former is the collection of servers
and the latter is the room or building.
A common use for a cluster is as an Internet Web server. When a Website expects thousands of requests per second for its pages, the most economical solution

38

INTRODUCTION

CHAP. 1

is often to build a data center with hundreds, or even thousands, of servers. The incoming requests are then sprayed among the servers to allow them to be processed
in parallel. For example, Google has data centers all over the world to service
search requests, the largest one, in The Dalles, Oregon, is a facility that is as large
as two (U.S.) football fields. The location was chosen because data centers require
vast amounts of electric power and The Dalles is the site of a 2 GW hydroelectric
dam on the Columbia River that can provide it. Altogether, Google is thought to
have more than 1,000,000 servers in its data centers.
The computer business is a dynamic one, with things changing all the time. In
the 1960s, computing was dominated by giant mainframe computers (see below)
costing tens of millions of dollars to which users connected using small remote terminals. This was a very centralized model. Then in the 1980s personal computers
arrived on the scene, millions of people bought one, and computing was decentralized.
With the advent of data centers, we are starting to relive the past in the form of
cloud computing, which is mainframe computing V2.0. The idea here is that
everyone will have one or more simple devices, including PCs, notebooks, tablets,
and smartphones that are essentially user interfaces to the cloud (i.e, the data center) where all the user’s photos, videos, music, and other data are stored. In this
model, the data are accessible from different devices anywhere and at any time
without the user having to keep track of where they are. Here, the data center full
of servers has replaced the single large centralized computer, but the paradigm has
reverted back to the old one: the users have simple terminals and data and computing power is centralized somewhere else.
Who knows how long this model will be popular? It could easily happen in 10
years that so many people have stored so many songs, photos, and videos in the
cloud that the (wireless) infrastructure for communicating with it has become completely bogged down. This could lead to a new revolution: personal computers,
where people store their own data on their own machines locally, thus bypassing
the traffic jam over the air.
The take-home message here is that the model of computing popular in a given
era depends a lot on the technology, economics, and applications available at the
time and can change when these factors change.

