When the next generation appeared, people who were hoping for the Sexium
(sex is Latin for six) were sorely disappointed. The name Pentium was now so

42

INTRODUCTION

CHAP. 1

well known that the marketing people wanted to keep it, and the new chip was called the Pentium Pro. Despite the small name change from its predecessor, this
processor represented a major break with the past. Instead, of having two or more
pipelines, the Pentium Pro had a very different internal organization and could execute up to five instructions at a time.
Another innovation found in the Pentium Pro was a two-level cache memory.
The processor chip itself had 8 kilobytes of fast memory to hold commonly used
instructions and another 8 kilobytes of fast memory to hold commonly used data.
In the same cavity within the Pentium Pro package (but not on the chip itself) was
a second cache memory of 256 kilobytes.
Although the Pentium Pro had a big cache, it lacked the MMX instructions
(because Intel was unable to manufacture such a large chip with acceptable yields).
When the technology improved enough to get both the MMX instructions and the
cache on one chip, the combined product was released as the Pentium II. Next, yet
more multimedia instructions, called SSE (Streaming SIMD Extensions), were
added for enhanced 3D graphics (Raman et al., 2000). The new chip was dubbed
the Pentium III, but internally it was essentially a Pentium II.
The next Pentium, released in Nov. 2000, was based on a different internal architecture but had the same instruction set as the earlier Pentiums. To celebrate
this event, Intel switched from Roman numerals to Arabic numbers and called it
the Pentium 4. As usual, the Pentium 4 was faster than all its predecessors. The
3.06-GHz version also introduced an intriguing new feature—hyperthreading.
This feature allowed programs to split their work into two threads of control which
the Pentium 4 could run in parallel, speeding up execution. In addition, another
batch of SSE instructions was added to speed up audio and video processing even
more.
In 2006, Intel changed the brand name from Pentium to Core and released a
dual core chip, the Core 2 duo. When Intel decided it wanted a cheaper single-core version of the chip, it just sold Core 2 duos with one core disabled because wasting a little silicon on each chip manufacturered was ultimately cheaper
than incurring the enormous expense of designing and testing a new chip from
scratch. The Core series has continued to evolve, with the i3, i5, and i7 being popular variants for low-, medium-, and high-performance computers. No doubt more
variants will follow. A photo of the i7 is presented in Fig. 1-12. There are actually
eight cores on it, but except in the Xeon version, only six are enabled. This approach means that a chip with one or two defective cores can still be sold by disabling the defective one(s). Each core has its own level 1 and level 2 caches, but
there is also a shared level 3 (L3) cache used by all the cores. We will discuss
caches in detail later in this book.
In addition to the mainline desktop CPUs discussed so far, Intel has manufactured variants of some of the Pentium chips for special markets. In early 1998,
Intel introduced a new product line called the Celeron, which was basically a lowprice, low-performance version of the Pentium 2 intended for low-end PCs. Since

SEC. 1.4

EXAMPLE COMPUTER FAMILIES

43

Figure 1-12. The Intel Core i7-3960X die. The die is 21 by 21 mm and has 2.27
billion transistors. © 2011 Intel Corporation. Used by permission.

the Celeron has the same architecture as the Pentium 2, we will not discuss it further in this book. In June 1998, Intel introduced a special version of the Pentium 2
for the upper end of the market. This processor, called the Xeon, had a larger
cache, a faster bus, and better multiprocessor support but was otherwise a normal
Pentium 2, so we will not discuss it separately either. The Pentium III also had a
Xeon version as do more recent chips. On more recent chips, one feature of the
Xeon is more cores.
1n 2003, Intel introduced the Pentium M (as in Mobile), a chip designed for
notebook computers. This chip was part of the Centrino architecture, whose goals
were lower power consumption for longer battery lifetime; smaller, lighter, computers; and built-in wireless networking capability using the IEEE 802.11 (WiFi)
standard. The Pentium M was very low power and much smaller than the Pentium
4, two characteristics that would soon allow it (and its successors) to subsume the
Pentium 4 microarchitecture in future Intel products.
All the Intel chips are backward compatible with their predecessors as far back
as the 8086. In other words, a Pentium 4 or Core can run old 8086 programs without modification. This compatibility has always been a design requirement for
Intel, to allow users to maintain their existing investment in software. Of course,

44

INTRODUCTION

CHAP. 1

the Core is four orders of magnitude more complex than the 8086, so it can do
quite a few things that the 8086 could not do. These piecemeal extensions have resulted in an architecture that is not as elegant as it might have been had someone
given the Pentium 4 architects 42 million transistors and instructions to start all
over again.
It is interesting to note that although Moore’s law has long been associated
with the number of bits in a memory, it applies equally well to CPU chips. By
plotting the transistor counts given in Fig. 1-8 against the date of introduction of
each chip on a semilog scale, we see that Moore’s law holds here too. This graph
is given in Fig. 1-13.
10G
1G
Pentium III

100M
Moore’s law

1M
Transistors

Core i7

Pentium II
Pentium

10M
80286
