2, 3, and 4?
7. In what sense are hardware and software equivalent? In what sense are they not equivalent?
8. Babbage’s difference engine had a fixed program that could not be changed. Is this essentially the same thing as a modern CD-ROM that cannot be changed? Explain your
answer.
9. One of the consequences of von Neumann’s idea to store the program in memory is
that programs can be modified, just like data. Can you think of an example where this
facility might have been useful? (Hint: Think about doing arithmetic on arrays.)
10. The performance ratio of the 360 model 75 was 50 times that of the 360 model 30, yet
the cycle time was only five times as fast. How do you account for this discrepancy?
11. Two system designs are shown in Fig. 1-5 and Fig. 1-6. Describe how input/output
might occur in each system. Which one has the potential for better overall system performance?
12. Suppose that each of the 300 million people in the United States fully consumes two
packages of goods a day bearing RFID tags. How many RFID tags have to be pro-

CHAP. 1

PROBLEMS

53

duced annually to meet that demand? At a penny a tag, what is the total cost of the
tags? Given the size of GDP, is this amount of money going to be an obstacle to their
use on every package offered for sale?
13. Name three appliances that are candidates for being run by an embedded CPU.
14. At a certain point in time, a transistor on a chip was 0.1 micron in diameter. According
to Moore’s law, how big would a transistor be on next year’s model?
15. It has been shown that Moore’s law not only applies to semiconductor density, but it
also predicts the increase in (reasonable) simulation sizes, and the reduction in computational simulation run-times. First show for a fluid mechanics simulation that takes 4
hours to run on a machine today, that it should only take 1 hour to run on machines
built 3 years from now, and only 15 minutes on machines built 6 years from now.
Then show that for a large simulation that has an estimated run-time of 5 years that it
would complete sooner if we waited 3 years to start the simulation.
16. In 1959, an IBM 7090 could execute about 500,000 instructions/sec, had a memory of
32,768 36-bit words, and cost $3 million. Compare this to a current computer and determine how much better the current one is by multiplying the ratio of memory sizes
and speeds and then dividing this by the ratio of the prices. Now see what the same
gains would have done to aviation in the same time period. The Boeing 707 was delivered to the airlines in substantial quantities in 1959. Its speed was 950 km/hr and its
capacity was initially 180 passengers. It cost $4 million. What would the speed, capacity, and cost of an aircraft now be if it had the same gains as a computer? Clearly,
state your assumptions about speed, memory size, and price.
17. Developments in the computer industry are often cyclic. Originally, instruction sets
were hardwired, then they were microprogrammed, then RISC machines came along
and they were hardwired again. Originally, computing was centralized on large mainframe computers. List two developments that demonstrate the cyclic behavior here as
well.
18. The legal issue of who invented the computer was settled in April 1973 by Judge Earl
Larson, who handled a patent infringement lawsuit filed by the Sperry Rand Corporation, which had acquired the ENIAC patents. Sperry Rand’s position was that everybody making a computer owed them royalties because it owned the key patents. The
case went to trial in June 1971 and over 30,000 exhibits were entered. The court transcript ran to over 20,000 pages. Study this case more carefully using the extensive
information available on the Internet and write a report discussing the technical aspects
of the case. What exactly did Eckert and Mauchley patent and why did the judge feel
their system was based on Atanasoff’s earlier work?
19. Pick the three people you think were most influential in creating modern computer
hardware and write a short report describing their contributions and why you picked
them.
20. Pick the three people you think were most influential in creating modern computer systems software and write a short report describing their contributions and why you
picked them.

54

INTRODUCTION

CHAP. 1

21. Pick the three people you think were most influential in creating modern Websites that
draw a lot of traffic and write a short report describing their contributions and why you
picked them.

2
COMPUTER SYSTEMS
ORGANIZATION

A digital computer consists of an interconnected system of processors, memories, and input/output devices. This chapter is an introduction to these three components and to their interconnection, as background for a more detailed examination of the specific levels in the five subsequent chapters. Processors, memories,
and input/output are key concepts and will be present at every level, so we will
start our study of computer architecture by looking at all three in turn.

2.1 PROCESSORS
The organization of a simple bus-oriented computer is shown in Fig. 2-1. The
CPU (Central Processing Unit) is the ‘‘brain’’ of the computer. Its function is to
execute programs stored in the main memory by fetching their instructions, examining them, and then executing them one after another. The components are connected by a bus, which is a collection of parallel wires for transmitting address,
data, and control signals. Buses can be external to the CPU, connecting it to memory and I/O devices, but also internal to the CPU, as we will see shortly. Modern
computers have multiple buses.
The CPU is composed of several distinct parts. The control unit is responsible
for fetching instructions from main memory and determining their type. The arithmetic logic unit performs operations such as addition and Boolean AND needed to
carry out the instructions.
55

56

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

Central processing unit (CPU)

Control
unit
Arithmetic
logical unit
(ALU)

I/O devices

Registers
