
matters is the average sustained rate over a period of seconds, which has to take
into account the necessary seeks and rotational delays as well.
A little thought and the use of that old high-school math formula for the circumference of a circle, c = 2π r, will reveal that the outer tracks have more linear
distance around them than the inner ones do. Since all magnetic disks rotate at a
constant angular velocity, no matter where the heads are, this observation creates a
problem. In older drives, manufacturers used the maximum possible linear density
on the innermost track, and successively lowered linear bit densities on tracks further out. If a disk had 18 sectors per track, for example, each one occupied 20
degrees of arc, no matter which cylinder it was in.
Nowadays, a different strategy is used. Cylinders are divided into zones (typically 10 to 30 per drive), and the number of sectors per track is increased in each
zone moving outward from the innermost track. This change makes keeping track
of information harder but increases the drive capacity, which is viewed as more important. All sectors are the same size. A disk with five zones is shown in
Fig. 2-21.
Sector

Figure 2-21. A disk with five zones. Each zone has many tracks.

Associated with each drive is a disk controller, a chip that controls the drive.
Some controllers contain a full CPU. The controller’s tasks include accepting
commands from the software, such as READ, WRITE, and FORMAT (writing all the
preambles), controlling the arm motion, detecting and correcting errors, and converting 8-bit bytes read from memory into a serial bit stream and vice versa. Some
controllers also handle buffering of multiple sectors, caching sectors read for

SEC. 2.3

SECONDARY MEMORY

91

potential future use, and remapping bad sectors. This latter function is caused by
the existence of sectors with a bad (permanently magnetized) spot. When the controller discovers a bad sector, it replaces it by one of the spare sectors reserved for
this purpose within each cylinder or zone.

2.3.3 IDE Disks
Modern personal computer disks evolved from the one in the IBM PC XT,
which was a 10-MB Seagate disk controlled by a Xebec disk controller on a plugin card. The Seagate disk had 4 heads, 306 cylinders, and 17 sectors/track. The
controller was capable of handling two drives. The operating system read from
and wrote to a disk by putting parameters in CPU registers and then calling the
BIOS (Basic Input Output System), located in the PC’s built-in read-only memory. The BIOS issued the machine instructions to load the disk controller registers
that initiated transfers.
The technology evolved rapidly from having the controller on a separate board,
to having it closely integrated with the drives, starting with IDE (Integrated Drive
Electronics) drives in the mid 1980s. However, the BIOS calling conventions
were not changed for reasons of backward compatibility. These calling conventions addressed sectors by giving their head, cylinder, and sector numbers, with the
heads and cylinders numbered starting at 0 and the sectors starting at 1. This
choice was probably due to a mistake on the part of the original BIOS programmer,
who wrote his masterpiece in 8088 assembler. With 4 bits for the head, 6 bits for
the sector, and 10 bits for the cylinder, the maximum drive could have 16 heads, 63
sectors, and 1024 cylinders, for a total of 1,032,192 sectors. Such a maximum
drive has a capacity of 504 MB, which probably seemed like infinity at the time
but certainly does not today. (Would you fault a new machine today that could not
handle drives bigger than 1000 TB?)
Unfortunately, before too long, drives below 504 MB appeared but with the
wrong geometry (e.g., 4 heads, 32 sectors, 2000 cylinders is 256,000 sectors).
There was no way for the operating system to address them due to the long-frozen
BIOS calling conventions. As a result, disk controllers began to lie, pretending
that the geometry was within the BIOS limits but actually remapping the virtual
geometry onto the real geometry. Although this approach worked, it wreaked
havoc with operating systems that carefully placed data to minimize seek times.
Eventually, IDE drives evolved into EIDE drives (Extended IDE), which also
support a second addressing scheme called LBA (Logical Block Addressing),
which just numbers the sectors starting at 0 up until a maximum of 228 − 1. This
scheme requires the controller to convert LBA addresses to head, sector, and cylinder addresses, but at least it does get beyond the 504-MB limit. Unfortunately, it
created a new bottleneck at 228 × 29 bytes (128 GB). In 1994, when the EIDE
standard was adopted, nobody in their wildest imagination could imagine 128-GB

92

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

disks. Standards committees, like politicians, have a tendency to push problems
forward in time so the next committee has to solve them.
EIDE drives and controllers also had other improvements as well. For example, EIDE controllers could have two channels, each with a primary and a secondary drive. This arrangement allowed a maximum of four drives per controller.
CD-ROM and DVD drives were also supported, and the transfer rate was increased
from 4 MB/sec to 16.67 MB/sec.
As disk technology continued to improve, the EIDE standard continued to
evolve, but for some reason the successor to EIDE was called ATA-3 (AT Attachment), a reference to the IBM PC/AT (where AT referred to the then-Advanced
Technology of a 16-bit CPU running at 8 MHz). In the next edition, the standard
was called ATAPI-4 (ATA Packet Interface) and the speed was increased to 33
MB/sec. In ATAPI-5 it went to 66 MB/sec.
By this time, the 128-GB limit imposed by the 28-bit LBA addresses was
looming larger and larger, so ATAPI-6 changed the LBA size to 48 bits. The new
standard will run into trouble when disks reach 248 × 29 bytes (128 PB). With a
50% annual increase in capacity, the 48-bit limit will probably last until about
2035. To find out how the problem was solved, please consult the 11th edition of
this book. The smart money is betting on increasing the LBA size to 64 bits. The
ATAPI-6 standard also increased the transfer rate to 100 MB/sec and addressed the
issue of disk noise for the first time.
The ATAPI-7 standard is a radical break with the past. Instead of increasing
the size of the drive connector (to increase the data rate), this standard uses what is
called serial ATA to transfer 1 bit at a time over a 7-pin connector at speeds starting at 150 MB/sec and expected to rise over time to 1.5 GB/sec. Replacing the old
80-wire flat cable with a round cable only a few mm thick improves airflow within
the computer. Also, serial ATA uses 0.5 volts for signaling (compared to 5 volts on
ATAPI-6 drives), which reduces power consumption. It is likely that within a few
years, all computers will use serial ATA. The issue of power consumption by disks
is an increasingly important one, both at the high end, where data centers have vast
disk farms, and at the low end, where notebooks are power limited (Gurumurthi et
al., 2003).
