To program the flash bit cell, a high voltage (in the computer world 12 V is a
high voltage) is applied to the control gate, which accelerates the process of hot

SEC. 2.3

SECONDARY MEMORY

99

carrier injection into the floating gate. Electrons become embedded into the floating gate, which places a negative charge internal to the flash transistor. The embedded negative charge increases the voltage necessary to turn on the flash transistor,
and by testing whether or not the channel turns on with a high or low voltage, it is
possible to determine whether the floating gate is charged or not, resulting in a 0 or
1 value for the flash cell. The embedded charge remains in the transistor, even if
power is removed from the system, making the flash memory cell nonvolatile.
Because SSDs are essentially memory, they have superior performance to spinning disks and have zero seek time. While a typical magnetic disk can access data
up to 100 MB/sec, a SSD can operate two to three times faster. And because the
device has no moving parts, it is particularly suited for use in notebook computers,
where jarring and movement will not affect its ability to access data. The downside
of SSDs, compared to magnetic disks, is their cost. While magnetic disks cost pennies/gigabyte, a typical SSD will cost one to three dollars/gigabyte, making their
use appropriate only for smaller drive applications or situations that are not cost
sensitive. The cost of SSDs is dropping, but they still have a long way to go to
catch up to cheap magnetic disks. So while SSDs are replacing magnetic disks in
many computers, it will likely be a long time before the magnetic disk goes the
way of the dinosaur (unless another big meteorite strikes the earth, in which cases
the SSDs are probably not going to survive either).
Another disadvantage of SSDs compared with magnetic disks is their failure
rate. A typical flash cell can be written only about 100,000 times before it will no
longer function. The process of injecting electrons into the floating gate slowly
damages it and the surrounding insulators, until it can no longer function. To increase the lifetime of SSDs, a technique called wear leveling is used to spread
writes out to all flash cells in the disk. Every time a new disk block is written, the
destination block is reassigned to a new SSD block that has not been recently written. This requires the use of a logical block map inside the flash drive, which is one
of the reasons that flash drives have high internal storage overheads. Using wear
leveling, a flash drive can support a number of writes equal to the number of writes
a cell can sustain times the number of blocks on the disk.
Some SSDs are able to encode multiple bits per byte using multilevel flash
cells. The technology carefully controls the amount of charge placed into the floating gate. An increasing sequence of voltages is then applied to the control gate to
determine how much charge is stored in the floating gate. Typical multilevel cells
will support four charge levels, yielding two bits per flash cell.

2.3.7 CD-ROMs
Optical disks were originally developed for recording television programs, but
they can be put to more esthetic use as computer storage devices. Due to their
large capacity and low price optical disks are widely used for distributing software,
books, movies, and data of all kinds, as well as making backups of hard disks.

100

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

First-generation optical disks were invented by the Dutch electronics conglomerate Philips for holding movies. They were 30 cm across and marketed under the
name LaserVision, but they did not catch on, except in Japan.
In 1980, Philips, together with Sony, developed the CD (Compact Disc), which
rapidly replaced the 33 1/3 RPM vinyl record for music. The precise technical details for the CD were published in an official International Standard (IS 10149),
popularly called the Red Book, after to the color of its cover. (International Standards are issued by the International Organization for Standardization, which is the
international counterpart of national standards groups like ANSI, DIN, etc. Each
one has an IS number.) The point of publishing the disk and drive specifications as
an International Standard is to allow CDs from different music publishers and
players from different electronics manufacturers to work together. All CDs are 120
mm across and 1.2 mm thick, with a 15-mm hole in the middle. The audio CD was
the first successful mass-market digital storage medium. Audio CDs are supposed
to last 100 years. Please check back in 2080 for an update on how well the first
batch did.
A CD is prepared by using a high-power infrared laser to burn 0.8-micron
diameter holes in a coated glass master disk. From this master, a mold is made,
with bumps where the laser holes were. Into this mold, molten polycarbonate is
injected to form a CD with the same pattern of holes as the glass master. Then a
thin layer of reflective aluminum is deposited on the polycarbonate, topped by a
protective lacquer and finally a label. The depressions in the polycarbonate substrate are called pits; the unburned areas between the pits are called lands.
When a CD is played back, a low-power laser diode shines infrared light with
a wavelength of 0.78 micron on the pits and lands as they stream by. The laser is
on the polycarbonate side, so the pits stick out in the direction of the laser as
bumps in the otherwise flat surface. Because the pits have a height of one-quarter
the wavelength of the laser light, light reflecting off a pit is half a wavelength out
of phase with light reflecting off the surrounding surface. As a result, the two parts
interfere destructively and return less light to the player’s photodetector than light
bouncing off a land. This is how the player tells a pit from a land. Although it
might seem simplest to use a pit to record a 0 and a land to record a 1, it is more
reliable to use a pit/land or land/pit transition for a 1 and its absence as a 0, so this
scheme is used.
The pits and lands are written in a single continuous spiral starting near the
hole and working out a distance of 32 mm toward the edge. The spiral makes
22,188 revolutions around the disk (about 600 per mm). If unwound, it would be
5.6 km long. The spiral is illustrated in Fig. 2-25.
To make the music play at a uniform rate, it is necessary for the pits and lands
to stream by at a constant linear velocity. Consequently, the rotation rate of the
CD must be continuously reduced as the reading head moves from the inside of the
CD to the outside. At the inside, the rotation rate is 530 RPM to achieve the desired streaming rate of 120 cm/sec; at the outside it has to drop to 200 RPM to give

SEC. 2.3

101

SECONDARY MEMORY

Spiral groove

Pit
Land
