are not at all in the same performance category as magnetic-disk drives, despite
their large capacity.
In 1986, Philips struck again with the Green Book, adding graphics and the
ability to interleave audio, video, and data in the same sector, a feature essential for
multimedia CD-ROMs.
The last piece of the CD-ROM puzzle is the file system. To make it possible to
use the same CD-ROM on different computers, agreement was needed on CDROM file systems. To get this agreement, representatives of many computer companies met at Lake Tahoe in the High Sierras on the California-Nevada boundary
and devised a file system that they called High Sierra. It later evolved into an International Standard (IS 9660). It has three levels. Level 1 uses file names of up to
8 characters optionally followed by an extension of up to 3 characters (the MS-DOS
file naming convention). File names may contain only uppercase letters, digits,
and the underscore. Directories may be nested up to eight deep, but directory
names may not contain extensions. Level 1 requires all files to be contiguous,
which is not a problem on a medium written only once. Any CD-ROM conformant to IS 9660 level 1 can be read using MS-DOS, an Apple computer, a UNIX
computer, or just about any other computer. CD-ROM publishers regard this property as a big plus.
IS 9660 level 2 allows names up to 32 characters, and level 3 allows noncontiguous files. The Rock Ridge extensions (whimsically named after the town in the
Mel Brooks film Blazing Saddles) allow very long names (for UNIX), UIDs, GIDs,
and symbolic links, but CD-ROMs not conforming to level 1 will not be readable
on old computers.

2.3.8 CD-Recordables
Initially, the equipment needed to produce a master CD-ROM (or audio CD,
for that matter) was extremely expensive. But in the computer industry nothing
stays expensive for long. By the mid 1990s, CD recorders no bigger than a CD
player were a common peripheral available in most computer stores. These devices were still different from magnetic disks because once written, CD-ROMs
could not be erased. Nevertheless, they quickly found a niche as a backup medium
for large magnetic hard disks and also allowed individuals or startup companies to

104

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

manufacture their own small-run CD-ROMs (hundreds, not thousands) or make
masters for delivery to high-volume commercial CD duplication plants. These
drives are known as CD-Rs (CD-Recordables).
Physically, CD-Rs start with 120-mm polycarbonate blanks that are like CDROMs, except that they contain a 0.6-mm-wide groove to guide the laser for writing. The groove has a sinusoidal excursion of 0.3 mm at a frequency of exactly
22.05 kHz to provide continuous feedback so the rotation speed can be accurately
monitored and adjusted if need be. The first CD-Rs looked like regular CD-ROMs,
except that they were colored gold on top instead of silver. The gold color came
from the use of real gold instead of aluminum for the reflective layer. Unlike silver
CDs, which have physical depressions, on CD-Rs the differing reflectivity of pits
and lands has to be simulated. This is done by adding a layer of dye between the
polycarbonate and the reflective layer, as shown in Fig. 2-27. Two kinds of dye are
used: cyanine, which is green, and pthalocyanine, which is a yellowish orange.
Chemists can argue endlessly about which one is better. Eventually, an aluminum
reflective layer replaced the gold one.
Printed label
Protective lacquer
Reflective layer
layer
Dye

Dark spot in the
dye layer burned
by laser when
writing

1.2 mm
Polycarbonate
Direction
of motion

Photodetector

Substrate

Lens
Prism
Infrared
laser
diode

Figure 2-27. Cross section of a CD-R disk and laser (not to scale). A CD-ROM
has a similar structure, except without the dye layer and with a pitted aluminum
layer instead of a reflective layer.

In its initial state, the dye layer is transparent and lets the laser light pass
through and reflect off the reflective layer. To write, the CD-R laser is turned up to
high power (8–16 mW). When the beam hits a spot of dye, it heats up, breaking a
chemical bond. This change to the molecular structure creates a dark spot. When
read back (at 0.5 mW), the photodetector sees a difference between the dark spots
where the dye has been hit and transparent areas where it is intact. This difference

SEC. 2.3

SECONDARY MEMORY

105

is interpreted as the difference between pits and lands, even when read back on a
regular CD-ROM reader or even on an audio CD player.
No new kind of CD could hold up its head with pride without a colored book,
so CD-R has the Orange Book, published in 1989. This document defines CD-R
and also a new format, CD-ROM XA, which allows CD-Rs to be written incrementally, a few sectors today, a few tomorrow, and a few next month. A group of
consecutive sectors written at once is called a CD-ROM track.
One of the first uses of CD-R was for the Kodak PhotoCD. In this system the
customer brings a roll of exposed film and his old PhotoCD to the photo processor
and gets back the same PhotoCD with the new pictures added after the old ones.
The new batch, which is created by scanning in the negatives, is written onto the
