Semireflective
layer
Aluminum
reflector

Adhesive layer
Aluminum
reflector

0.6 mm
Single-sided
disk
Polycarbonate substrate 2

Semireflective
layer

Figure 2-28. A double-sided, dual layer DVD disk.

DVD was devised by a consortium of 10 consumer electronics companies,
seven of them Japanese, in close cooperation with the major Hollywood studios
(some of which are owned by the Japanese electronics companies in the consortium). The computer and telecommunications industries were not invited to the

108

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

picnic, and the resulting focus was on using DVD for movie rentals. For example,
standard features include real-time skipping of dirty scenes (to allow parents to
turn a film rated NC17 into one safe for toddlers), six-channel sound, and support
for Pan-and-Scan. The latter feature allows the DVD player to dynamically decide
how to crop the left and right edges off movies (whose width:height ratio is 3:2) to
fit on then-current television sets (whose aspect ratio was 4:3).
Another item the computer industry probably would not have thought of is an
intentional incompatibility between disks intended for the United States and disks
intended for Europe and yet other standards for other continents. Hollywood demanded this ‘‘feature’’ because new films are often released first in the United
States and then physically shipped to Europe when the videos come out in the
United States. The idea was to make sure European video stores could not buy
videos in the U.S. too early, thereby reducing new movies’ European theater sales.
If Hollywood had been running the computer industry, we would have had 3.5-inch
floppy disks in the United States and 9-cm floppy disks in Europe.

2.3.11 Blu-ray
Nothing stands still in the computer business, certainly not storage technology.
DVD was barely introduced before its successor threatened to make it obsolete.
The successor to DVD is Blu-ray, so called because it uses a blue laser instead of
the red one used by DVDs. A blue laser has a shorter wavelength than a red one,
which allows it to focus more accurately and thus support smaller pits and lands.
Single-sided Blu-ray disks hold about 25 GB of data; double-sided ones hold about
50 GB. The data rate is about 4.5 MB/sec, which is good for an optical disk, but
still insignificant compared to magnetic disks (cf. ATAPI-6 at 100 MB/sec and
wide Ultra5 SCSI at 640 MB/sec). It is expected that Blu-ray will eventually replace CD-ROMs and DVDs, but this transition will take some years.

2.4 INPUT/OUTPUT
As we mentioned at the start of this chapter, a computer system has three
major components: the CPU, the memories (primary and secondary), and the I/O
(Input/Output) equipment such as printers, scanners, and modems. So far we
have looked at the CPU and the memories. Now it is time to examine the I/O
equipment and how it is connected to the rest of the system.

2.4.1 Buses
Physically, most personal computers and workstations have a structure similar
to the one shown in Fig. 2-29. The usual arrangement is a metal box with a large
printed circuit board at the bottom or side, called the motherboard (parentboard,

SEC. 2.4

INPUT/OUTPUT

109

for the politically correct). The motherboard contains the CPU chip, some slots
into which DIMM modules can be clicked, and various support chips. It also contains a bus etched along its length, and sockets into which the edge connectors of
I/O boards can be inserted.
SCSI controller
Sound card

Modem

Card cage
Edge connector

Figure 2-29. Physical structure of a personal computer.

The logical structure of a simple personal computer is shown in Fig. 2-30.
This one has a single bus used to connect the CPU, memory, and I/O devices; most
systems have two or more buses. Each I/O device consists of two parts: one containing most of the electronics, called the controller, and one containing the I/O
device itself, such as a disk drive. The controller is usually integrated directly onto
the motherboard or sometimes contained on a board plugged into a free bus slot.
Even though the display (monitor) is not an option, the video controller is sometimes located on a plug-in board to allow the user to choose between boards with
or without graphics accelerators, extra memory, and so on. The controller connects
to its device by a cable attached to a connector on the back of the box.
The job of a controller is to control its I/O device and handle bus access for it.
When a program wants data from the disk, for example, it gives a command to the
disk controller, which then issues seeks and other commands to the drive. When
the proper track and sector have been located, the drive begins outputting the data
as a serial bit stream to the controller. It is the controller’s job to break the bit
stream up into units and write each unit into memory, as it is assembled. A unit is
