controller

Main
memory

Video
controller

Network
controller
PCI bus

Figure 2-31. A typical PC built around the PCI bus. The SCSI controller is a
PCI device.

No matter how fast something is in the computer world, a lot of people think it
is too slow. This fate also befell the PCI bus, which is being replaced by PCI
Express, abbreviated as PCIe. Most modern computers support both, so users can
attach new, fast devices to the PCIe bus and older, slower ones to the PCI bus.
While the PCI bus was just an upgrade to the older ISA bus with higher speeds
and more bits transferred in parallel, PCIe represents a radical change from the PCI
bus. In fact, it is not even a bus at all. It is point-to-point network using bit-serial
lines and packet switching, more like the Internet than like a traditional bus. It’s
architecture is shown in Fig. 2-32.

112

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CPU
Cache

CHAP. 2

Memory

Root complex
Port 1

Port 2
PCIe device

PCIe device

PCIe device

Port 3
PCI bridge

Switch

PCI bus

PCIe device

PCIe device

PCIe device

Figure 2-32. Sample architecture of a PCIe system with three PCIe ports.

Several things stand out immediately about PCIe. First, the connections between the devices are serial, that is, 1-bit wide rather than 8-, 16-, 32-, or 64-bits
wide. While one might think that a 64-bit-wide connection would have a higher
bandwidth than a 1-bit wide connection, in practice, differences in propagation
time of the 64 bits, called the skew, means relatively low speeds have to be used.
With a serial connection much higher speeds can be used and this more than offsets
the loss of parallelism. PCI buses run at a maximum clock rate of 66 MHz. With
64 bits transferred per cycle, the data rate is 528 MB/sec. With a clock rate of 8
Gbps, even with serial transfer, the data rate of PCIe is 1 GB/sec. Furthermore, devices are not limited to a single wire pair to communicate with the root complex or
a switch. A device can have up to 32 wire pairs, called lanes. These lanes are not
synchronous, so skew is not important here. Most motherboards have a 16-lane
slot for the graphics card, which in PCIe 3.0 will give the graphics card a bandwidth of 16 GB/sec, about 30 times faster than what a PCI graphics card can get.
This bandwidth is necessary for increasingly demanding applications, such as 3D.
Second, all communication is point to point. When the CPU wants to talk to a
device, it sends a packet to the device and generally later gets an answer. The
packet goes through the root complex, which is on the motherboard, and then on to
the device, possibly through a switch (or if the device is a PCI device, through the
PCI bridge). This evolution from a system in which all devices listened to the
same bus to one using point-to-point communications parallels the development of
Ethernet (a popular local area network), which also started with a broadcast channel but now uses switches to enable point-to-point communication.

SEC. 2.4

INPUT/OUTPUT

113

2.4.2 Terminals
Many kinds of I/O devices are available today. A few of the common ones are
discussed below. Computer terminals consist of two parts: a keyboard and a monitor. In the mainframe world, these parts are often integrated into a single device
and attached to the main computer by a serial line or over a telephone line. In the
airline reservation, banking, and other mainframe-oriented industries, these devices
are still in use. In the personal computer world, the keyboard and monitor are independent devices. Either way, the technology of the two parts is the same.
Keyboards
Keyboards come in several varieties. The original IBM PC came with a
keyboard that had a snap-action switch under each key that gave tactile feedback
and made a click when the key was depressed far enough. Nowadays, the cheaper
keyboards have keys that just make mechanical contact when depressed. Better
ones have a sheet of elastometric material (a kind of rubber) between the keys and
the underlying printed circuit board. Under each key is a small dome that buckles
