when depressed far enough. A small spot of conductive material inside the dome
closes the circuit. Some keyboards have a magnet under each key that passes
through a coil when struck, thus inducing a current that can be detected. Various
other methods, both mechanical and electromagnetic, are also in use.
On personal computers, when a key is depressed, an interrupt is generated and
the keyboard interrupt handler (a piece of software that is part of the operating system) is started. The interrupt handler reads a hardware register inside the keyboard
controller to get the number of the key (1 through 102) that was just depressed.
When a key is released, a second interrupt is caused. Thus if a user depresses the
SHIFT key, then depresses and releases the M key, then releases the SHIFT key,
the operating system can see that the user wants an uppercase ‘‘M’’ rather than a
lowercase ‘‘m.’’ Handling of multikey sequences involving SHIFT, CTRL, and
ALT is done entirely in software (including the infamous CTRL-ALT-DEL key sequence that is used to reboot PCs).
Touch Screens
While keyboards are in no danger of going the way of the manual typewriter,
there is a new kid on the block when it comes to computer input: the touch screen.
While these devices only became mass-market items with the introduction of
Apple’s iPhone in 2007, they go back much further. The first touch screen was developed at the Royal Radar Establishment in Malvern, U.K. in 1965. Even the
much-heralded pinching capability of the iPhone dates back to work at the University of Toronto in 1982. Since then, many different technologies have been developed and marketed.

114

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

Touch devices fall into two categories: opaque and transparent. A typical
opaque touch device is the touchpad on a notebook computer. A typical transparent device is the screen of a smart phone or tablet. We will only consider the latter
here. They are usually called touch screens. The major types of touch screens are
infrared, resistive, and capacitive.
Infrared screens have infrared transmitters, such as infrared light emitting
diodes or lasers on (for example) the left and top edges of the bezel around the
screen and detectors on the right and bottom edges. When a finger, stylus, or any
opaque object blocks one or more beams, the corresponding detector senses the
drop in signal and the hardware of the device can tell the operating system which
beams have been blocked, allowing it to compute the (x, y) coordinates of the finger or stylus. While these devices have a long history and are still in use in kiosks
and other applications, they are not used for mobile devices.
Another old technology consists of resistive touch screens. These consist of
two layers, the top one of which is flexible. It contains a large number of horizontal
wires. The one under it contains vertical wires. When a finger or other object
depresses a point on the screen, one or more of the upper wires comes in contact
with (or close to) the perpendicular wires in the lower layer. The electronics of the
device make it possible to read out which area has been depressed. These screens
can be built very inexpensively and are widely used in price-sensitive applications.
Both of these technologies are fine when the screen is pressed by one finger
but have a problem when two fingers are used. To describe the problem, we will
use the terminology of the infrared touch screen but the resistive one has the same
problem. Imagine that the two fingers are at (3, 3) and (8, 8). As a result, the x = 3
and x = 8 vertical beams are interrupted as are the y = 3 and y = 8 horizontal
beams. Now consider a different scenario with the fingers at (3, 8) and (8, 3),
which are the opposite corners of the rectangle whose corners are (3, 3), (8, 3), (8,
8), and (3, 8). Precisely the same beams are blocked, so the software has no way of
telling which of the two scenarios holds. This problem is called ghosting.
To be able to detect multiple fingers at the same time—a property required for
pinching and expanding gestures—a new technology was needed. The one used on
most smart phones and tablets (but not on digital cameras and other devices) is the
projected capacitive touch screen. There are various types but the most common
one is the mutual capacitance type. All touch screens that can detect two or more
points of contact at the same time are known as multitouch screens. Let us now
briefly see how they work.
For readers who are a bit rusty on their high-school physics, a capacitor is a
device that can store electric charge. A simple one has two conductors separated by
an insulator. In modern touch screens, a grid-like pattern of thin ‘‘wires’’ running
vertically is separated from a horizontal grid by a thin insulating layer. When a finger touches the screen, it changes the capacitance at all the intersections touched
(possibly far apart). This change can be measured. As a demonstration that a modern touch screen is not like the older infrared and resistive screens, try touching

SEC. 2.4

INPUT/OUTPUT

115

one with a pen, pencil, paper clip, or gloved finger and you will see that nothing
happens. The human body is good at storing electric charge, as anyone who has
shuffled across a rug on a cold, dry day and then touched a metal doorknob can
painfully testify. Plastic, wooden, and metal instruments are not nearly as good as
people in terms of their capacitance.
The ‘‘wires’’ in a touch screen are not the usual copper wires found in normal
electrical devices since they would block the light from the screen. Instead they
are thin (typically 50 micron) strips of transparent, conducting indium tin oxide
bonded to opposite sides of a thin glass plate, which together form the capacitors.
In some newer designs, the insulating glass plate is replaced by a thin layer of silicon dioxide (sand!), with the three layers sputtered (sprayed, atom by atom) onto
some substrate. Either way, the capacitors are protected from dirt and scratching by
a glass plate placed above, to form the surface of the screen to be touched. The
thinner the upper glass plate, the more sensitive the performance but the more fragile the device is.
In operation, voltages are applied alternately to the horizontal and vertical
‘‘wires’’ while the voltage values, which are affected by the capacitance of each
intersection, are read off the other ones. This operation is repeated many times per
second with the coordinates touched fed to the device driver as a stream of (x, y)
pairs. Further processing, such as determining whether pointing, pinching, expanding, or swiping is taking place is done by the operating system. If you use all
10 fingers, and bring a friend to add some more, the operating system will have its
hands full, but the multitouch hardware will be up to the job.
Flat Panel Displays
The first computer monitors used cathode ray tubes (CRTs), just like old television sets. They were far too bulky and heavy to be used in notebook computers,
so a more compact display technology had to be developed for their screens. The
development of flat panel displays provided the compact form factor necessary for
notebooks, and these devices also used less power. Today the size and power benefits of the flat panel display have all but eliminated the use of CRT monitors.
The most common flat panel display technology is the LCD (Liquid Crystal
Display). It is highly complex, has many variations, and is changing rapidly, so
this description will, of necessity, be brief and greatly simplified.
Liquid crystals are viscous organic molecules that flow like a liquid but also
