have spatial structure, like a crystal. They were discovered by an Austrian botanist, Friedrich Reinitzer, in 1888 and first applied to displays (e.g., calculators,
watches) in the 1960s. When all the molecules are lined up in the same direction,
the optical properties of the crystal depend on the direction and polarization of the
incoming light. Using an applied electric field, the molecular alignment, hence the
optical properties, can be changed. In particular, by shining a light through a liquid

116

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

crystal, the intensity of the light exiting from it can be controlled electrically. This
property can be exploited to construct flat panel displays.
An LCD display screen consists of two parallel glass plates between which is a
sealed volume containing a liquid crystal. Transparent electrodes are attached to
both plates. A light behind the rear plate (either natural or artificial) illuminates
the screen from behind. The transparent electrodes attached to each plate are used
to create electric fields in the liquid crystal. Different parts of the screen get different voltages, to control the image displayed. Glued to the front and rear of the
screen are polarizing filters because the display technology requires the use of
polarized light. The general setup is shown in Fig. 2-33(a).
Liquid crystal
Rear glass plate
Rear
electrode
Rear
polaroid

Front glass plate
Front electrode
Front polaroid

y
Dark

z

Bright

Light
source

Notebook computer
(b)
(a)

Figure 2-33. (a) The construction of an LCD screen. (b) The grooves on the rear
and front plates are perpendicular to one another.

Although many kinds of LCD displays are in use, we will now consider one
particular kind, the TN (Twisted Nematic) display, as an example. In this display,
the rear plate contains tiny horizontal grooves and the front plate contains tiny vertical grooves, as illustrated in Fig. 2-33(b). In the absence of an electric field, the
LCD molecules tend to align with the grooves. Since the front and rear alignments
differ by 90 degrees, the molecules (and thus the crystal structure) twist from rear
to front.
At the rear of the display is a horizontal polarizing filter. It allows in only horizontally polarized light. At the front of the display is a vertical polarizing filter. It
allows only vertically polarized light to pass through. If there were no liquid pres-

SEC. 2.4

INPUT/OUTPUT

117

ent between the plates, horizontally polarized light let in by the rear polarizing filter would be blocked by the front polarizing filter, making the screen black.
However the twisted crystal structure of the LCD molecules guides the light as
it passes and rotates its polarization, making it come out vertically. Thus in the
absence of an electric field, the LCD screen is uniformly bright. By applying a
voltage to selected parts of the plate, the twisted structure can be destroyed, blocking the light in those parts.
Two schemes can be used for applying the voltage. In a (low-cost) passive
matrix display, both electrodes contain parallel wires. In a 1920 × 1080 display
(the size for full high-definition video), for example, the rear electrode might have
1920 vertical wires and the front one 1080 horizontal ones. By putting a voltage
on one of the vertical wires and then pulsing one of the horizontal ones, the voltage
at one selected pixel position can be changed, making it go dark briefly. A pixel
(originally a picture element, is a colored dot from which all digital images are
built). By repeating this pulse with the next pixel and then the next one, a dark
scan line can be painted. Normally, the entire screen is painted 60 times a second
to fool the eye into thinking there is a constant image there.
The other scheme in widespread use is the active matrix display. It is more
expensive but it gives a better image. Instead of just having two sets of perpendicular wires, it has a tiny switching element at each pixel position on one of the electrodes. By turning these on and off, an arbitrary voltage pattern can be created across the screen, allowing for an arbitrary bit pattern. The switching elements are
called thin film transistors and the flat panel displays using them are often called
TFT displays. Most notebook computers and stand-alone flat panel displays for
desktop computers use TFT technology now.
So far we have described how a monochrome display works. Suffice it to say
that color displays use the same general principles as monochrome displays but the
details are a great deal more complicated. Optical filters are used to separate the
white light into red, green, and blue components at each pixel position so these can
be displayed independently. Every color can be built up from a linear superposition of these three primary colors.
Still new screen technologies are on the horizon. One of the more promising is
the Organic Light Emitting Diode (OLED) display. It consists of layers of electrically charged organic molecules sandwiched between two electrodes. Voltage
changes cause the molecules to get excited and move to higher energy states.
When they drop back to their normal state, they emit light. More detail is beyond
the scope of this book (and its authors).
Video RAM
Most monitors are refreshed 60–100 times per second from a special memory,
called a video RAM, on the display’s controller card. This memory has one or
more bit maps that represent the screen image. On a screen with, say, 1920 × 1080

118
