
COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

pixels, the video RAM would contain 1920 × 1080 values, one for each pixel. In
fact, it might contain many such bit maps, to allow rapid switching from one
screen image to another.
On a garden-variety display, each pixel would be represented as a 3-byte RGB
value, one each for the intensity of the red, green, and blue components of the
pixel’s color (high-end displays use 10 or more bits per color). From the laws of
physics, it is known that any color can be constructed from a linear superposition
of red, green, and blue light.
A video RAM with 1920 × 1080 pixels at 3 bytes/pixel requires over 6.2 MB
to store the image and a fair amount of CPU time to do anything with it. For this
reason, some computers compromise by using an 8-bit number to indicate the color
desired. This number is then used as an index into a hardware table called the
color palette that contains 256 entries, each holding a 24-bit RGB value. Such a
design, called indexed color, reduces the video RAM memory requirements by
2/3, but allows only 256 colors on the screen at once. Usually, each window on the
screen has its own mapping, but with only one hardware color palette, often when
multiple windows are present on the screen, only the current one has its colors rendered correctly. Color palettes with 216 entries are also used, but the gain here is
only 1/3.
Bit-mapped video displays require a lot of bandwidth. To display full-screen,
full-color multimedia on a 1920 × 1080 display requires copying 6.2 MB of data to
the video RAM for every frame. For full-motion video, a rate of at least 25
frame/sec is needed, for a total data rate of 155 MB/sec. This load is more than the
original PCI bus could handle (132 MB/sec) but PCIe can handle it with ease.

2.4.3 Mice
As time goes on, computers are being used by people with less expertise in
how computers work. Computers of the ENIAC generation were used only by the
people who built them. In the 1950s, computers were only used by highly skilled
professional programmers. Now, computers are widely used by people who need
to get some job done and do not know (or even want to know) much about how
computers work or how they are programmed.
In the old days, most computers had command line interfaces, to which users
typed commands. Since people who are not computer specialists often perceived
command line interfaces as user-unfriendly, if not downright hostile, many computer vendors developed point-and-click interfaces, such as the Macintosh and
Windows. Using this model requires having a way to point at the screen. The
most common way of allowing users to point at the screen is with a mouse.
A mouse is a small plastic box that sits on the table next to the keyboard.
When it is moved around on the table, a little pointer on the screen moves too, allowing users to point at screen items. The mouse has one, two, or three buttons on
top, to allow users to select items from menus. Much blood has been spilled as a

SEC. 2.4

119

INPUT/OUTPUT

result of arguments about how many buttons a mouse ought to have. Naive users
prefer one (it is hard to push the wrong button if there is only one), but sophisticated ones like the power of multiple buttons to do fancy things.
Three kinds of mice have been produced: mechanical mice, optical mice, and
optomechanical mice. The first mice had two rubber wheels protruding through
the bottom, with their axles perpendicular to one another. When the mouse was
moved parallel to its main axis, one wheel turned. When it is moved perpendicular
to its main axis, the other one turned. Each wheel drove a variable resistor or
potentiometer. By measuring changes in the resistance, it was possible to see how
much each wheel had rotated and thus calculate how far the mouse had moved in
each direction. Later, this design was been replaced by one in which a ball that
protruded slightly from the bottom was used instead of wheels. It is shown in
Fig. 2-34.
Pointer controlled by mouse
Window

Menu

Cut
Paste
Copy

Mouse buttons
Mouse

Rubber ball

Figure 2-34. A mouse being used to point to menu items.

The second kind of mouse is the optical mouse. This kind has no wheels or
ball. Instead, it has an LED (Light Emitting Diode) and a photodetector on the
bottom. Early optical mice required a mouse pad with closely spaced lines on it to
detect how many lines had been crossed and thus how far the mouse had moved.
Modern optical mice contain an LED that illuminates the imperfections of the
underlying surface along with a tiny video camera that records a small image (typically 18 × 18 pixels) up to 1000 times/sec. Consecutive images are compared to
see how far the mouse has moved. Some optical mice use a laser instead of an
LED for illumination. They are more accurate, but also more expensive.
The third kind of mouse is optomechanical. Like the newer mechanical
mouse, it has a rolling ball that turns two shafts aligned at 90 degrees to each other.

120

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

The shafts are connected to encoders that have slits through which light can pass.
As the mouse moves, the shafts rotate, and light pulses strike the detectors whenever a slit comes between an LED and its detector. The number of pulses detected
is proportional to the amount of motion.
Although mice can be set up in various ways, a common arrangement is to
