
photocopy machines. In fact, many companies make devices that combine copying
and printing (and sometimes fax as well).
The basic technology is illustrated in Fig. 2-36. The heart of the printer is a
rotating precision drum (or in some high-end systems, a belt). At the start of each
page cycle, it is charged up to about 1000 volts and coated with a photosensitive
material. Then light from a laser is scanned along the length of the drum by
reflecting it of a rotating octagonal mirror. The light beam is modulated to produce
a pattern of light and dark spots. The spots where the beam hits lose their charge.
Rotating octagonal
mirror

Laser

Drum sprayed and charged
Light beam
strikes drum
Drum

Toner
Scraper
Discharger
Heated
rollers
Blank
paper

Stacked
output

Figure 2-36. Operation of a laser printer.

After a line of dots has been painted, the drum rotates a fraction of a degree to
allow the next line to be painted. Eventually, the first line of dots reaches the toner,
a reservoir of an electrostatically sensitive black powder. The toner is attracted to
those dots that are still charged, thus forming a visual image of that line. A little
later in the transport path, the toner-coated drum is pressed against the paper, transferring the black powder to the paper. The paper is then passed through heated
rollers to fuse the toner to the paper permanently, fixing the image. Later in its
rotation, the drum is discharged and scraped clean of any residual toner, preparing
it for being charged and coated again for the next page.
That this process is an exceedingly complex combination of physics, chemistry, mechanical engineering, and optical engineering hardly needs to be said.
Nevertheless, complete assemblies, called print engines, are available from several
vendors. Laser printer manufacturers combine the print engines with their own
electronics and software to make a complete printer. The electronics consist of a
fast embedded CPU along with megabytes of memory to hold a full-page bit map
and numerous fonts, some of them built in and some of them downloadable. Most

124

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

printers accept commands that describe the pages to be printed (as opposed to simply accepting bit maps prepared by the main CPU). These commands are given in
languages such as HP’s PCL and Adobe’s PostScript or PDF, which are complete,
albeit specialized, programming languages.
Laser printers at 600 dpi and up can do a reasonable job of printing black and
white photographs but the technology is trickier than it might at first appear. Consider a photograph scanned in at 600 dpi that is to be printed on a 600-dpi printer.
The scanned image contains 600 × 600 pixels/inch, each one consisting of a gray
value from 0 (white) to 255 (black). The printer can also print 600 dpi, but each
printed pixel is either black (toner present) or white (no toner present). Gray values cannot be printed.
The usual solution to printing images with gray values is to use halftoning, the
same as commercially printed posters. The image is broken up into halftone cells,
each typically 6 × 6 pixels. Each cell can contain between 0 and 36 black pixels.
The eye perceives a cell with many pixels as darker than one with fewer pixels.
Gray values in the range 0 to 255 are represented by dividing this range into 37
zones. Values from 0 to 6 are in zone 0, values from 7 to 13 are in zone 1, and so
on (zone 36 is slightly smaller than the others because 37 does not divide 256 exactly). Whenever a gray value in zone 0 is encountered, its halftone cell on the
paper is left blank, as illustrated in Fig. 2-37(a). A zone-1 value is printed as 1
black pixel. A zone-2 value is printed as 2 black pixels, as shown in Fig. 2-37(b).
Other zone values are shown in Fig. 2-37(c)–(f). Of course, taking a photograph
scanned at 600 dpi and halftoning this way reduces the effective resolution to 100
cells/inch, called the halftone screen frequency, conventionally measured in lpi
(lines per inch).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 2-37. Halftone dots for various grayscale ranges. (a) 0–6. (b) 14–20.
(c) 28–34. (d) 56–62. (e) 105–111. (f) 161–167.

Color Printing
Although most laser printers are monochrome, color laser printers are starting
to become more common, so some explanation of color printing (also applicable to
inkjet and other printers) is perhaps useful here. As you might imagine, it is not
trivial. Color images can be viewed in one of two ways: transmitted light and
reflected light. Transmitted-light images, such as those produced on monitors, are

SEC. 2.4

INPUT/OUTPUT
