switch from 0 to 1 or 1 to 0. In more sophisticated phase-modulated systems, at
the start of each indivisible time interval, the phase of the carrier is abruptly shifted

SEC. 2.4

INPUT/OUTPUT

129

by 45, 135, 225, or 315 degrees, to allow 2 bits per time interval, called dibit phase
encoding. For example, a phase shift of 45 degrees could represent 00, a phase
shift of 135 degrees could represent 01, and so on. Schemes for transmitting 3 or
more bits per time interval also exist. The number of time intervals (i.e., the number of potential signal changes per second) is the baud rate. With 2 or more bits
per interval, the bit rate will exceed the baud rate. Many people confuse these two
terms. Again: the baud rate is the number of times the signal changes per second
whereas the bit rate is the number of bits transmitted per second. The bit rate is
generally a multiple of the baud rate, but theoretically it can be lower.
If the data to be transmitted consist of a series of 8-bit characters, it would be
desirable to have a connection capable of transmitting 8 bits simultaneously—that
is, eight pairs of wires. Because voice-grade telephone lines provide only one
channel, the bits must be sent serially, one after another (or in groups of two if dibit
encoding is being used). The device that accepts characters from a computer in the
form of two-level signals, 1 bit at a time, and transmits the bits in groups of 1 or 2,
in amplitude-, frequency-, or phase-modulated form, is the modem. To mark the
start and end of each character, an 8-bit character is normally sent preceded by a
start bit and followed by a stop bit, making 10 bits in all.
The transmitting modem sends the individual bits within one character at regularly spaced time intervals. For example, 9600 baud implies one signal change
every 104 μ sec. A second modem at the receiving end is used to convert a modulated carrier to a binary number. Because the bits arrive at the receiver at regularly
spaced intervals, once the receiving modem has determined the start of the character, its clock tells it when to sample the line to read the incoming bits.
Modern modems run at 56 kbps, usually at much lower baud rates. They use a
combination of techniques to send multiple bits per baud, modulating the amplitude, frequency, and phase. All are full-duplex, meaning they can transmit in both
directions at the same time (on different frequencies). Modems or transmission
lines that can transmit only in one direction at a time (like a single-track railroad
that can handle northbound trains or southbound trains but not at the same time)
are called half-duplex. Lines that can transmit in only one direction are simplex.
Digital Subscriber Lines
When the telephone industry finally got to 56 kbps, it patted itself on the back
for a job well done. Meanwhile, the cable TV industry was offering speeds up to
10 Mbps on shared cables, and satellite companies were planning to offer upward
of 50 Mbps. As Internet access became an increasingly important part of their business, the telcos (telephone companies) began to realize they needed a more competitive product than dialup lines. Their answer was to start offering a new digital
Internet access service. Services with more bandwidth than standard telephone
service are sometimes called broadband, although the term really is more of a
marketing concept than anything else. From a very narrow technical perspective,

130

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

broadband means there are multiple signaling channels whereas baseband means
there is only one. Thus in theory, 10-gigabit Ethernet, which is far faster than any
telephone-company-provided ‘‘broadband’’ service, is not broadband at all since it
has only one signaling channel.
Initially, there were many overlapping offerings, all under the general name of
xDSL (Digital Subscriber Line), for various x. Below we will discuss what has
become the most popular of these services, ADSL (Asymmetric DSL). ADSL is
still being developed and not all the standards are fully in place, so some of the details given below may change in time, but the basic picture should remain valid.
For more information about ADSL, see Summers (1999) and Vetter et al. (2000).
The reason that modems are so slow is that telephones were invented for carrying the human voice and the entire system has been carefully optimized for this
purpose. Data have always been stepchildren. The wire, called the local loop,
from each subscriber to the telephone company’s office has traditionally been limited to about 3000 Hz by a filter in the telco office. It is this filter that limits the
data rate. The actual bandwidth of the local loop depends on its length, but for typical distances of a few kilometers, 1.1 MHz is feasible.
The most common approach to offering ADSL is illustrated in Fig. 2-39. In
effect, what it does is remove the filter and divide the available 1.1-MHz spectrum
on the local loop into 256 independent channels of 4312.5 Hz each. Channel 0 is
used for POTS (Plain Old Telephone Service). Channels 1–5 are not used, to
keep the voice signal and data signals from interfering with each other. Of the remaining 250 channels, one is used for upstream control and one for downstream
control. The rest are available for user data. ADSL is like having 250 modems.

Power

256 4-kHz Channels

0
Voice

25

1100 kHz
Upstream

Downstream

Figure 2-39. Operation of ADSL.

In principle, each of the remaining channels can be used for a full-duplex data
stream, but harmonics, crosstalk, and other effects keep practical systems well
below the theoretical limit. It is up to the provider to determine how many channels are used for upstream and how many for downstream. A 50–50 mix of
upstream and downstream is technically possible, but most providers allocate
something like 80%–90% of the bandwidth to the downstream channel since most
users download more data than they upload. This choice gives rise to the ‘‘A’’ in
ADSL. A common split is 32 channels for upstream and the rest for downstream.

SEC. 2.4

131

INPUT/OUTPUT

