Within each channel the line quality is constantly monitored and the data rate
adjusted continuously as needed, so different channels may have different data
rates. The actual data are sent using a combination of amplitude and phase modulation with up to 15 bits per baud. With, for example, 224 downstream channels
and 15 bits/baud at 4000 baud, the downstream bandwidth is 13.44 Mbps. In practice, the signal-to-noise ratio is never good enough to achieve this rate, but 4–8
Mbps is possible on short runs over high-quality loops.
A typical ADSL arrangement is shown in Fig. 2-40. In this scheme, the user
or a telephone company technician must install a NID (Network Interface Device) on the customer’s premises. This small plastic box marks the end of the telephone company’s property and the start of the customer’s property. Close to the
NID (or sometimes combined with it) is a splitter, an analog filter that separates
the 0–4000 Hz band used by POTS from the data. The POTS signal is routed to
the existing telephone or fax machine, and the data signal is routed to an ADSL
modem. The ADSL modem is actually a digital signal processor that has been set
up to act as 250 modems operating in parallel at different frequencies. Since most
current ADSL modems are external, the computer must be connected to it at high
speed. Usually, this is done by putting an Ethernet card in the computer and operating a very short two-node Ethernet containing only the computer and ADSL
modem. (Ethernet is a popular and inexpensive local area network standard.)
Occasionally the USB port is used instead of Ethernet. In the future, internal
ADSL modem cards will no doubt become available.

Voice
switch

Telephone
Codec
Splitter

Telephone
line

Splitter
NID
Computer

DSLAM

To ISP
Telephone company end office

ADSL
modem

Ethernet
Customer premises

Figure 2-40. A typical ADSL equipment configuration.

At the other end of the wire, on the telco side, a corresponding splitter is installed. Here the voice portion of the signal is filtered out and sent to the normal

132

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

voice switch. The signal above 26 kHz is routed to a new kind of device called a
DSLAM (Digital Subscriber Line Access Multiplexer), which contains the same
kind of digital signal processor as the ADSL modem. Once the digital signal has
been recovered into a bit stream, packets are formed and sent off to the ISP.
Internet over Cable
Many cable TV companies are now offering Internet access over their cables.
Since the technology is quite different from ADSL, it is worth looking at briefly.
The cable operator in each city has a main office and a large number of boxes full
of electronics, called headends, spread all over its territory. The headends are connected to the main office by high-bandwidth cables or fiber optics.
Each headend has one or more cables that run from it past hundreds of homes
and offices. Each cable customer taps onto the cable as it passes the customer’s
premises. Thus hundreds of users share the same cable to the headend. Usually,
the cable has a bandwidth of about 750 MHz. This system is radically different
from ADSL because each telephone user has a private (i.e., not shared) wire to the
telco office. However, in practice, having your own 1.1-MHz channel to a telco
office is not that different than sharing a 200-MHz piece of cable spectrum to the
headend with 400 users, half of whom are not using it at any one instant. It does
mean, however, that a cable Internet user will get much better service at 4 A.M.
than at 4 P.M, whereas ADSL service is constant all day long. People intent on getting optimal Internet over cable service might wish to consider moving to a rich
neighborhood (houses far apart so fewer customers per cable) or a poor neighborhood (nobody can afford Internet service).
Since the cable is a shared medium, determining who may send when and at
which frequency is a big issue. To see how that works, we have to briefly describe
how cable TV operates. Cable television channels in North America normally
occupy the 54–550 MHz region (except for FM radio from 88 to 108 MHz). These
channels are 6 MHz wide, including guard bands to prevent signal leakage between
channels. In Europe the low end is usually 65 MHz and the channels are 6–8 MHz
wide for the higher resolution required by PAL and SECAM, but otherwise the allocation scheme is similar. The low part of the band is not used for television
transmission.
When introducing Internet over cable, the cable companies had two problems
to solve:
1. How to add Internet access without interfering with TV programs.
2. How to have two-way traffic when amplifiers are inherently one way.
The solutions chosen are as follows. Modern cables have a bandwidth of at least
550 MHz, often as much as 750 MHz or more. The upstream (i.e., user to headend) channels go in the 5–42 MHz band (but slightly higher in Europe) and the

SEC. 2.4

133

INPUT/OUTPUT

downstream (i.e., headend to user) traffic uses the frequencies at the high end, as illustrated in Fig. 2-41.
5 42 54 88
108

Upstream
frequencies
