There is much more to be said about cable modems. Some relevant references
are Adams and Dulchinos (2001), Donaldson and Jones (2001), and Dutta-Roy
(2001).

2.4.7 Digital Cameras
An increasingly popular use of computers is for digital photography, making
digital cameras a kind of computer peripheral. Let us briefly see how that works.
All cameras have a lens that forms an image of the subject in the back of the camera. In a conventional camera, the back of the camera is lined with film, on which
a latent image is formed when light strikes it. The latent image can be made visible by the action of certain chemicals in the film developer. A digital camera
works the same way except that the film is replaced by a rectangular array of
CCDs (Charge-Coupled Devices) that are sensitive to light. (Some digital cameras use CMOS, but we will concentrate on the more common CCDs here.)
When light strikes a CCD, it acquires an electrical charge. The more light, the
more charge. The charge can be read off by an analog-to-digital converter as an
integer from 0 to 255 (on low-end cameras) or from 0 to 4095 (on digital singlelens-reflex cameras). The basic arrangement is shown in Fig. 2-43.
Each CCD produces a single value, independent of the color of light striking it.
To form color images, the CCDs are organized in groups of four elements. A
Bayer filter is placed on top of the CCD to allow only red light to strike one of the
four CCDs in each group, blue light to strike another one, and green light to strike

136

COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

R GR G
GB GB
RGR G
GB GB

Lens

CHAP. 2

One pixel is made
up for four CCDs,
one red, one blue,
and two green

Diaphragm
CPU

RAM
Flash memory

CCD array

Digital camera

Figure 2-43. A digital camera.

the other two. Two greens are used because using four CCDs to represent one
pixel is much more convenient than using three, and the eye is more sensitive to
green light than to red or blue light. When a digital camera manufacturer claims a
camera has, say, 6 million pixels, it is lying. The camera has 6 million CCDs,
which together form 1.5 million pixels. The image will be read out as an array of
2828 × 2121 pixels (on low-end cameras) or 3000 times 2000 pixels (on digital
SLRs), but the extra pixels are produced by interpolation by software inside the
camera.
When the camera’s shutter button is depressed, software in the camera performs three tasks: setting the focus, determining the exposure, and performing the
white balance. The autofocus works by analyzing the high-frequency information
in the image and then moving the lens until it is maximized, to give the most detail.
The exposure is determined by measuring the light falling on the CCDs and then
adjusting the lens diaphragm and exposure time to have the light intensity fall in
the middle of the CCDs’ range. Setting the white balance has to do with measuring the spectrum of the incident light to perform necessary color corrections in the
postprocessing.
Then the image is read off the CCDs and stored as a pixel array in the camera’s
internal RAM. High-end digital SLRs used by photojournalists can shoot eight
high-resolution frames per second for 5 seconds, and they need around 1 GB of internal RAM to store the images before processing and storing them permanently.
Low-end cameras have less RAM, but still quite a bit.

SEC. 2.4

INPUT/OUTPUT

137

In the post-capture phase, the camera’s software applies the white-balance
color correction to compensate for reddish or bluish light (e.g., from a subject in
shadow or the use of a flash). Then it applies an algorithm to do noise reduction
and another one to compensate for defective CCDs. After that, it attempts to
sharpen the image (unless this feature has been disabled) by looking for edges and
increasing the intensity gradient around them.
Finally, the image may be compressed to reduce the amount of storage required. A common format is JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group), in
which a two-dimensional spatial Fourier transform is applied and some of the
high-frequency components omitted. The result of this transformation is that the
image requires fewer bits to store but fine detail is lost.
When all the in-camera processing is completed, the image is written to the
storage medium, usually a flash memory or microdrive. The postprocessing and
writing can take several seconds per image.
When the user gets home, the camera can be connected to a computer, usually
using a USB or proprietary cable. The images are then transferred from the camera to the computer’s hard disk. Using special software, such as Adobe Photoshop,
the user can then crop the image, adjust brightness, contrast, and color balance,
sharpen, blur, or remove portions of the image, and apply numerous filters. When
the user is content with the result, the image files can be printed on a color printer,
uploaded over the Internet to a photo-sharing Website or photofinisher, or written
to CD-ROM or DVD for archival storage.
The amount of computing power, RAM, disk space, and software in a digital
SLR camera is mind boggling. Not only does the computer have to do all the
things mentioned above, but it also has to communicate with the CPU in the lens
and the CPU in the flash, refresh the image on the LCD screen, and manage all the
buttons, wheels, lights, displays, and gizmos on the camera in real time. This is an
