COMPUTER SYSTEMS ORGANIZATION

CHAP. 2

35. Write a procedure hamming(ascii, encoded) that converts the low-order 7 bits of ascii
into an 11-bit integer codeword stored in encoded.
36. Write a function distance(code, n, k) that takes an array code of n characters of k bits
each as input and returns the distance of the character set as output.

3
THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

At the bottom of the hierarchy of Fig. 1-2 we find the digital logic level, the
computer’s real hardware. In this chapter, we will examine many aspects of digital
logic, as a building block for the study of higher levels in subsequent chapters.
This subject is on the boundary of computer science and electrical engineering, but
the material is self-contained, so no previous hardware or engineering experience
is needed to follow it.
The basic elements from which all digital computers are constructed are amazingly simple. We will begin our study by looking at these basic elements and also
at the special two-valued algebra (Boolean algebra) used to analyze them. Next we
will examine some fundamental circuits that can be built using gates in simple
combinations, including circuits for doing arithmetic. The following topic is how
gates can be combined to store information, that is, how memories are organized.
After that, we come to the subject of CPUs and especially how single-chip CPUs
interface with memory and peripheral devices. Numerous examples from industry
will be discussed later in this chapter.

3.1 GATES AND BOOLEAN ALGEBRA
Digital circuits can be constructed from a small number of primitive elements
by combining them in innumerable ways. In the following sections we will describe these primitive elements, show how they can be combined, and introduce a
powerful mathematical technique that can be used to analyze their behavior.
147

148

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

3.1.1 Gates
A digital circuit is one in which only two logical values are present. Typically,
a signal between 0 and 0.5 volt represents one value (e.g., binary 0) and a signal
between 1 and 1.5 volts represents the other value (e.g., binary 1). Voltages outside these two ranges are not permitted. Tiny electronic devices, called gates, can
compute various functions of these two-valued signals. These gates form the hardware basis on which all digital computers are built.
The details of how gates work inside is beyond the scope of this book, belonging to the device level, which is below our level 0. Nevertheless, we will now
digress ever so briefly to take a quick look at the basic idea, which is not difficult.
All modern digital logic ultimately rests on the fact that a transistor can be made to
operate as a very fast binary switch. In Fig. 3-1(a) we have shown a bipolar transistor (the circle) embedded in a simple circuit. This transistor has three connections to the outside world: the collector, the base, and the emitter. When the
input voltage, V in , is below a certain critical value, the transistor turns off and acts
like an infinite resistance. This causes the output of the circuit, V out , to take on a
value close to V cc , an externally regulated voltage, typically +1.5 volts for this type
of transistor. When V in exceeds the critical value, the transistor switches on and
acts like a wire, causing V out to be pulled down to ground (by convention, 0 volts).
+Vcc
+Vcc
+Vcc
Vout
V1

Collector

Vout

Vout
Vin

V2

V1

V2

Emitter

Base
(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3-1. (a) A transistor inverter. (b) A NAND gate. (c) A NOR gate.

The important thing to notice is that when V in is low, V out is high, and vice
versa. This circuit is thus an inverter, converting a logical 0 to a logical 1, and a
logical 1 to a logical 0. The resistor (the jagged line) is needed to limit the amount
of current drawn by the transistor so it does not burn out. The time required to
switch from one state to the other is typically a nanosecond or less.

SEC. 3.1

149

GATES AND BOOLEAN ALGEBRA

In Fig. 3-1(b) two transistors are cascaded in series. If both V 1 and V 2 are
high, both transistors will conduct and V out will be pulled low. If either input is
low, the corresponding transistor will turn off, and the output will be high. In other
words, V out will be low if and only if both V 1 and V 2 are high.
In Fig. 3-1(c) the two transistors are wired in parallel instead of in series. In
