
CHAP. 3

3.2 BASIC DIGITAL LOGIC CIRCUITS
In the previous sections we saw how to implement truth tables and other simple circuits using individual gates. In practice, few circuits are actually constructed
gate-by-gate anymore, although this once was common. Nowadays, the usual
building blocks are modules containing a number of gates. In the following sections we will examine these building blocks more closely and see how they are
used and how they can be constructed from individual gates.

3.2.1 Integrated Circuits
Gates are not manufactured or sold individually but rather in units called Integrated Circuits, often called ICs or chips. An IC is a rectangular piece of silicon
of varied size depending on how many gates are required to implement the chip’s
components. Small dies will measure about 2 mm × 2 mm, while larger dies can be
as large as 18 mm × 18 mm. ICs are mounted into plastic or ceramic packages that
can be much larger than the dies they house, if many pins are required to connect
the chip to the outside world. Each pin connects to the input or output of some
gate on the chip or to power or to ground.
Figure 3-10 shows a number of common IC packages used for chips today.
Smaller chips, such as those used to house microcontrollers or RAM chips, will
use Dual Inline Packages or DIPs. A DIP is a package with two rows of pins that
fit into a matching socket on the motherboard. The most common DIP packages
have 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 28, 40, 64, or 68 pins. For large chips, square packages
with pins on all four sides or on the bottom are often used. Two common packages
for larger chips are Pin Grid Arrays or PGAs and Land Grid Arrays or LGAs.
PGA have pins on the bottom of the package, which fit into a matching socket on
the motherboard. PGA sockets often utilize a zero-insertion-force mechanism in
which the PGA can be placed into the socket without force, then a lever can be
thrown which will apply lateral pressure to all of the PGA’s pins, holding it firmly
in the PGA socket. LGAs, on the other hand, have small flat pads on the bottom of
the chip, and an LGA socket will have a cover that fits over the LGA and applies a
downward force on the chip, ensuring that all of the LGA pads make contact with
the LGA socket pads.
Because many IC packages are symmetric in shape, figuring out which orientation is correct is a perennial problem with IC installation. DIPs typically have a
notch in one end which matches a corresponding mark on the DIP socket. PGAs
typically have one pin missing, so if you attempt to insert the PGA into the socket
incorrectly, the PGA will not insert. Because LGAs do not have pins, correct installation is enforced by placing a notch on one or two sides of the LGA, which
matches a notch in the LGA socket. The LGA will not enter the socket unless the
two notches match.

SEC. 3.2

159

BASIC DIGITAL LOGIC CIRCUITS

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3-10. Common types of integrated-circuit packages, including a dual-inline package (a), pin grid array (b), and land grid array (c).

For our purposes, all gates are ideal in the sense that the output appears as soon
as the input is applied. In reality, chips have a finite gate delay, which includes
both the signal propagation time through the chip and the switching time. Typical
delays are 100s of picoseconds to a few nanoseconds.
It is within the current state of the art to put more than 1 billion transistors on a
single chip. Because any circuit can be built up from NAND gates, you might think
that a manufacturer could make a very general chip containing 500 million NAND
gates. Unfortunately, such a chip would need 1,500,000,002 pins. With the standard pin spacing of 1 millimeter, an LGA would have to be 38 meters on a side to
accommodate all of those pins, which might have a negative effect on sales. Clearly, the only way to take advantage of the technology is to design circuits with a
high gate/pin ratio. In the following sections we will look at simple circuits that
combine a number of gates internally to provide a useful function requiring only a
limited number of external connections (pins).

3.2.2 Combinational Circuits
Many applications of digital logic require a circuit with multiple inputs and
outputs in which the outputs are uniquely determined by the current input values.
Such a circuit is called a combinational circuit. Not all circuits have this property. For example, a circuit containing memory elements may generate outputs that
depend on the stored values as well as the input variables. A circuit implementing
a truth table, such as that of Fig. 3-3(a), is a typical example of a combinational circuit. In this section we will examine some frequently used combinational circuits.
Multiplexers
At the digital logic level, a multiplexer is a circuit with 2n data inputs, one
data output, and n control inputs that select one of the data inputs. The selected
data input is ‘‘gated’’ (i.e., sent) to the output. Figure 3-11 is a schematic diagram

160

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

for an eight-input multiplexer. The three control lines, A, B, and C, encode a 3-bit
number that specifies which of the eight input lines is gated to the OR gate and
thence to the output. No matter what value is on the control lines, seven of the
AND gates will always output 0; the other one may output either 0 or 1, depending
on the value of the selected input line. Each AND gate is enabled by a different
combination of the control inputs. The multiplexer circuit is shown in Fig. 3-11.
D0
D1
D2
D3
F

D4
D5
D6
D7
A A B B C C
