A

B

A

D2

A

D3

B

D4

B
C

C
C

D5

D6

D7

Figure 3-13. A three-to-eight decoder circuit.

The operation of the circuit of Fig. 3-13 is straightforward. Each AND gate has
three inputs, of which the first is either A or A, the second is either B or B, and the
third is either C or C. Each gate is enabled by a different combination of inputs:
D0 by A B C, D1 by A B C, and so on.
Comparators
Another useful circuit is the comparator, which compares two input words.
The simple comparator of Fig. 3-14 takes two inputs, A and B, each of length 4
bits, and produces a 1 if they are equal and a 0 otherwise. The circuit is based on
the XOR (EXCLUSIVE OR) gate, which puts out a 0 if its inputs are equal and a 1
otherwise. If the two input words are equal, all four of the XOR gates must output
0. These four signals can then be ORed together; if the result is 0, the input words
are equal, otherwise not. In our example we have used a NOR gate as the final
stage to reverse the sense of the test: 1 means equal, 0 means unequal.

SEC. 3.2

163

BASIC DIGITAL LOGIC CIRCUITS

EXCLUSIVE OR gate
A0
B0

A1
B1
A=B
A2
B2

A3
B3

Figure 3-14. A simple 4-bit comparator.

3.2.3 Arithmetic Circuits
It is now time to move on from the general-purpose circuits discussed above to
combinational circuits. As a reminder, combinational circuits have outs that are
functions of their inputs, but circuits used for doing arithmetic do not have this
property. We will begin with a simple 8-bit shifter, then look at how adders are
constructed, and finally examine arithmetic logic units, which play a central role in
any computer.
Shifters
Our first arithmetic circuit is an eight-input, eight-output shifter (see
Fig. 3-15). Eight bits of input are presented on lines D0 , . . . , D7 . The output,
which is just the input shifted 1 bit, is available on lines S 0 , . . . , S 7 . The control
line, C, determines the direction of the shift, 0 for left and 1 for right. On a left
shift, a 0 is inserted into bit 7. Similarly, on a right shift, a 1 is inserted into bit 0.
To see how the circuit works, notice the pairs of AND gates for all the bits except the gates on the end. When C = 1, the right member of each pair is turned on,
passing the corresponding input bit to output. Because the right AND gate is wired
to the input of the OR gate to its right, a right shift is performed. When C = 0, it is
the left member of the AND gate pair that turns on, doing a left shift.

164

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

D0

D1

D2

D3

D4

D5
