(c) Effect of (a) when control is low. (d) An inverting buffer.

Figure 3-29(d) shows an inverting buffer, which acts like a normal inverter
when control is high and disconnects the output from the circuit when control is
low. Both kinds of buffers are tri-state devices, because they can output 0, 1, or
none of the above (open circuit). Buffers also amplify signals, so they can drive
many inputs simultaneously. They are sometimes used in circuits for this reason,
even when their switching properties are not needed.

178

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

Getting back to the memory circuit, it should now be clear what the three noninverting buffers on the data output lines are for. When CS, RD, and OE are all high,
the output enable signal is also high, enabling the buffers and putting a word onto
the output lines. When any one of CS, RD, or OE is low, the data outputs are
disconnected from the rest of the circuit.

3.3.5 Memory Chips
The nice thing about the memory of Fig. 3-28 is that it extends easily to larger
sizes. As we drew it, the memory is 4 × 3, that is, four words of 3 bits each. To
extend it to 4 × 8 we need only add five more columns of four flip-flops each, as
well as five more input lines and five more output lines. To go from 4 × 3 to 8 × 3
we must add four more rows of three flip-flops each, as well as an address line A2 .
With this kind of structure, the number of words in the memory should be a power
of 2 for maximum efficiency, but the number of bits in a word can be anything.
Because integrated-circuit technology is well suited to making chips whose internal structure is a repetitive two-dimensional pattern, memory chips are an ideal
application for it. As the technology improves, the number of bits that can be put
on a chip keeps increasing, typically by a factor of two every 18 months (Moore’s
law). The larger chips do not always render the smaller ones obsolete due to different trade-offs in capacity, speed, power, price, and interfacing convenience.
Commonly, the largest chips currently available sell at a premium and thus are
more expensive per bit than older, smaller ones.
For any given memory size, there are various ways of organizing the chip.
Figure 3-30 shows two possible organizations for an older memory chip of size 4
Mbit: 512K × 8 and 4096K × 1. (As an aside, memory-chip sizes are usually
quoted in bits, rather than in bytes, so we will stick to that convention here.) In
Fig. 3-30(a), 19 address lines are needed to address one of the 219 bytes, and eight
data lines are needed for loading or storing the byte selected.
A note on terminology is in order here. On some pins, the high voltage causes
an action to happen. On others, the low voltage causes the action. To avoid confusion, we will consistently say that a signal is asserted (rather than saying it goes
high or goes low) to mean that it is set to cause some action. Thus, for some pins,
asserting it means setting it high. For others, it means setting the pin low. Pins
that are asserted low are given signal names containing an overbar. Thus, a signal
named CS is asserted high, but one named CS is asserted low. The opposite of
asserted is negated. When nothing special is happening, pins are negated.
Now let us get back to our memory chip. Since a computer normally has many
memory chips, a signal is needed to select the chip that is currently needed so that
it responds and all the others do not. The CS (Chip Select) signal is provided for
this purpose. It is asserted to enable the chip. Also, a way is needed to distinguish
reads from writes. The WE signal (Write Enable) is used to indicate that data are

SEC. 3.3
A0
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
A7
A8
A9
A10
A11
A12
A13
A14
A15
A16
A17
A18

179

MEMORY

512K × 8
Memory
chip
(4 Mbit)

D0
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
D7

A0
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
A7
