DDR chip running at 200 MHz outputs two 8-bit values 200 million times a second
(for a short interval, of course), giving a theoretical burst rate of 3.2 Gbps. The
DDR2 and DDR3 memory interfaces provide additional performance over DDR by
increasing the memory-bus speeds to 533 MHz and 1067 MHz, respectively. At
the time this book went to press, the fastest DDR3 chips could output data at
17.067 GB/sec.
Nonvolatile Memory Chips
RAMs are not the only kind of memory chips. In many applications, such as
toys, appliances, and cars, the program and some of the data must remain stored
even when the power is turned off. Furthermore, once installed, neither the program nor the data are ever changed. These requirements have led to the development of ROMs (Read-Only Memories), which cannot be changed or erased, intentionally or otherwise. The data in a ROM are inserted during its manufacture, essentially by exposing a photosensitive material through a mask containing the desired bit pattern and then etching away the exposed (or unexposed) surface. The
only way to change the program in a ROM is to replace the entire chip.
ROMs are much cheaper than RAMs when ordered in large enough volumes to
defray the cost of making the mask. However, they are inflexible, because they
cannot be changed after manufacture, and the turnaround time between placing an
order and receiving the ROMs may be weeks. To make it easier for companies to
develop new ROM-based products, the PROM (Programmable ROM) was invented. A PROM is like a ROM, except that it can be programmed (once) in the field,
eliminating the turnaround time. Many PROMs contain an array of tiny fuses inside. A specific fuse can be blown out by selecting its row and column and then
applying a high voltage to a special pin on the chip.
The next development in this line was the EPROM (Erasable PROM), which
can be not only field-programmed but also field-erased. When the quartz window
in an EPROM is exposed to a strong ultraviolet light for 15 minutes, all the bits are
set to 1. If many changes are expected during the design cycle, EPROMs are far
more economical than PROMs because they can be reused. EPROMs usually have
the same organization as static RAMs. The 4-Mbit 27C040 EPROM, for example,
uses the organization of Fig. 3-31(a), which is typical of a static RAM. What is interesting is that ancient chips like this one do not die off. They just become cheaper and find their way into lower-end products that are highly cost sensitive. A
27C040 can now be bought retail for under $3 and much less in large volumes.
Even better than the EPROM is the EEPROM which can be erased by applying pulses to it instead of putting it in a special chamber for exposure to ultraviolet
light. In addition, an EEPROM can be reprogrammed in place, whereas an
EPROM has to be inserted in a special EPROM programming device to be programmed. On the minus side, the biggest EEPROMs are typically only 1/64 as

SEC. 3.3

183

MEMORY

large as common EPROMs and they are only half as fast. EEPROMs cannot compete with DRAMs or SRAMs because they are 10 times slower, 100 times smaller
in capacity, and much more expensive. They are used only in situations where
their nonvolatility is crucial.
A more recent kind of EEPROM is flash memory. Unlike EPROM, which is
erased by exposure to ultraviolet light, and EEPROM, which is byte erasable, flash
memory is block erasable and rewritable. Like EEPROM, flash memory can be
erased without removing it from the circuit. Various manufacturers produce small
printed-circuit cards with up to 64 GB of flash memory on them for use as ‘‘film’’
for storing pictures in digital cameras and many other purposes. As we discussed
in Chap. 2, flash memory is now starting to replace mechanical disks. As a disk,
flash memory provides faster access times at lower power, but with a much higher
cost per bit. A summary of the various kinds of memory is given in Fig. 3-32.
Byte
alterable

Volatile

Electrical

Yes

Yes

Level 2 cache

Read/write

Electrical

Yes

Yes

Main memory (old)

Read/write

Electrical

Yes

Yes

Main memory (new)

ROM

Read-only

Not possible No

No

Large-volume appliances

PROM

Read-only

Not possible No

No

Small-volume equipment
