whether it is permitted to use the bus during the next cycle. Compared to centralized arbitration, this arbitration method requires more bus lines but avoids the
potential cost of the arbiter. It also limits the number of devices to the number of
request lines.
Another kind of decentralized bus arbitration, shown in Fig. 3-41, uses only
three lines, no matter how many devices are present. The first bus line is a wiredOR line for requesting the bus. The second bus line is called BUSY and is asserted
by the current bus master. The third line is used to arbitrate the bus. It is daisy
chained through all the devices. The head of this chain is held asserted by tying it
to the power supply.
Bus request
Busy
VCC
Arbitration
line

In Out

In Out

In Out

In Out

In Out

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 3-41. Decentralized bus arbitration.

When no device wants the bus, the asserted arbitration line is propagated
through to all devices. To acquire the bus, a device first checks to see if the bus is
idle and the arbitration signal it is receiving, IN, is asserted. If IN is negated, it may
not become bus master, and it negates OUT. If IN is asserted, however, and the device wants the bus, the device negates OUT, which causes its downstream neighbor
to see IN negated and to negate its OUT. Then all downstream devices all see IN
negated and correspondingly negate OUT. When the dust settles, only one device
will have IN asserted and OUT negated. This device becomes bus master, asserts
BUSY and OUT, and begins its transfer.
Some thought will reveal that the leftmost device that wants the bus gets it.
Thus, this scheme is similar to the original daisy chain arbitration, except without
having the arbiter, so it is cheaper, faster, and not subject to arbiter failure.

3.4.6 Bus Operations
Up until now, we have discussed only ordinary bus cycles, with a master (typically the CPU) reading from a slave (typically the memory) or writing to one. In
fact, several other kinds of bus cycles exist. We will now look at some of these.

SEC. 3.4

199

CPU CHIPS AND BUSES

Normally, one word at a time is transferred. However, when caching is used, it
is desirable to fetch an entire cache line (e.g., 8 consecutive 64-bit words) at once.
Often block transfers can be made more efficient than successive individual transfers. When a block read is started, the bus master tells the slave how many words
are to be transferred, for example, by putting the word count on the data lines during T 1 . Instead of just returning one word, the slave outputs one word during each
cycle until the count has been exhausted. Figure 3-42 shows a modified version of
Fig. 3-38(a), but now with an extra signal BLOCK that is asserted to indicate that a
block transfer is requested. In this example, a block read of 4 words takes 6 cycles
instead of 12.
T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

T6

Data

Data

Data

T7

Φ
ADDRESS

DATA

Memory address to be read

Count

Data

MREQ
RD
WAIT
