Even at camp-stove temperatures, you need not worry about the safety of the
Core i7. If the internal sensors detect that the processor is about to overheat, it will

206

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

initiate thermal throttling, which is a technique that quickly reduces heat generation by running the processor only every N th clock cycle. The larger the value of
N , the more the processor is throttled down, and the more quickly it will cool. Of
course, the cost of this throttling is a decrease in system performance. Prior to the
invention of thermal throttling, CPUs would burn up if their cooling system failed.
Evidence of these dark times of CPU thermal management can be found by searching for ‘‘exploding CPU’’ on YouTube. The video is fake but the problem is not.
The Clock signal provides the system clock to the processor, which internally
is used to generate variety of clocks based on a multiple or fraction of the system
clock. Yes, it is possible to generate a multiple of the system clock frequency,
using a very clever device called a delay-locked loop, or DLL.
The Diagnostics group contains signals for testing and debugging systems in
conformance with the IEEE 1149.1 JTAG (Joint Test Action Group) test standard.
Finally, the miscellaneous group is a hodge-podge of other signals that have various special purposes.
Pipelining on the Core i7’s DDR3 Memory Bus
Modern CPUs like the Core i7 place heavy demands on DRAM memories. Individual processors can produce access requests much faster than a slow DRAM
can produce values, and this problem is compounded when multiple processors are
making simultaneous requests. To keep the CPUs from starving for lack of data, it
is essential to get the maximum possible throughput from the memory. For this
reason, the Core i7 DDR3 memory bus can be operated in a pipelined manner, with
as many as four simultaneous memory transactions going on at the same time. We
saw the concept of pipelining in Chap. 2 in the context of a pipelined CPU (see
Fig. 2-4), but memories can also be pipelined.
To allow pipelining, Core i7 memory requests have three steps:
1. The memory ACTIVATE phase, which ‘‘opens’’ a DRAM memory
row, making it ready for subsequent memory accesses.
2. The memory READ or WRITE phase, where multiple accesses can
be made to individual words within the currently open DRAM row or
to multiple sequential words within the current DRAM row using a
burst mode.
3. The PRECHARGE phase, which ‘‘closes’’ the current DRAM memory row, and prepares the DRAM memory for the next ACTIVATE
command.
The secret to the Core i7’s pipelined memory accesses is that DDR3 DRAMs
are organized with multiple banks within the DRAM chip. A bank is a block of
DRAM memory, which may be accessed in parallel with other DRAM memory

SEC. 3.5

207

EXAMPLE CPU CHIPS

banks, even if they are contained in the same chip. A typical DDR3 DRAM chip
will have as many as 8 banks of DRAM. However, the DDR3 interface specification allows only up to four concurrent accesses on a single DDR3 channel. The
timing diagram in Fig. 3-46 illustrates the Core i7 making 4 memory accesses to
three distinct DRAM banks. The accesses are fully overlapped, such that the
DRAM reads occur in parallel within the DRAM chip. The figure shows which
commands lead to later operations through the use of arrows in the timing diagram.
0

1

2

3

4

5

CMD

ACT
bank 0

ACT
bank 1

READ
bank 0

READ
bank 1

ACT
bank 2

PCHRG
bank 0

ADDR

row
bank 0

row
bank 1

col
bank 0

col
bank 1
