The REQ# and GNT# signals are for doing bus arbitration. These are not
asserted by the current bus master, but rather by a device that wants to become bus
master. The last mandatory signal is RST#, used for resetting the system, either due
to the user pushing the RESET button or some system device noticing a fatal error.
Asserting this signal resets all devices and reboots the computer.
Now we come to the optional signals, most of which relate to the expansion
from 32 bits to 64 bits. The REQ64# and ACK64# signals allow the master to ask
permission to conduct a 64-bit transaction and allow the slave to accept, respectively. The AD, PAR64, and C/BE# signals are just extensions of the corresponding 32-bit signals.
The next three signals are not related to 32 bits vs. 64 bits, but to multiprocessor systems, something that PCI boards are not required to support. The LOCK signal allows the bus to be locked for multiple transactions. The next two relate to
bus snooping to maintain cache coherence.
The INTx signals are for requesting interrupts. A PCI card can have up to four
separate logical devices on it, and each one can have its own interrupt request line.
The JTAG signals are for the IEEE 1149.1 JTAG testing procedure. Finally, the
M66EN signal is either wired high or wired low, to set the clock speed. It must not
change during system operation.
PCI Bus Transactions
The PCI bus is really very simple (as buses go). To get a better feel for it, consider the timing diagram of Fig. 3-55. Here we see a read transaction, followed by
an idle cycle, followed by a write transaction by the same bus master.
When the falling edge of the clock happens during T 1 , the master puts the
memory address on AD and the bus command on C/BE#. It then asserts FRAME# to
start the bus transaction.
During T 2 , the master floats the address bus to let it turn around in preparation
for the slave to drive it during T 3 . The master also changes C/BE# to indicate which
bytes in the word addressed it wants to enable (i.e., read in).
In T 3 , the slave asserts DEVSEL# so the master knows it got the address and is
planning to respond. It also puts the data on the AD lines and asserts TRDY# to tell
the master that it has done so. If the slave were not able to respond so quickly, it
would still assert DEVSEL# to announce its presence but keep TRDY# negated until it
could get the data out there. This procedure would introduce one or more wait
states.
In this example (and often in reality), the next cycle is idle. Starting in T 5 we
see the same master initiating a write. It starts out by putting the address and command onto the bus, as usual. Only now, in the second cycle it asserts the data.
Since the same device is driving the AD lines, there is no need for a turnaround
cycle. In T 7 , the memory accepts the data.

SEC. 3.6

223

EXAMPLE BUSES

Bus cycle
Read

T1

Idle

T2

T3

T4

Write

T5

T6

T7

Φ
Turnaround
AD
C/BE#

Address
Read cmd

Data
Enable

Address

Data

Write cmd

Enable

FRAME#
IRDY#
DEVSEL#
TRDY#

Figure 3-55. Examples of 32-bit PCI bus transactions. The first three cycles are
used for a read operation, then an idle cycle, and then three cycles for a write operation.

3.6.2 PCI Express
Although the PCI bus works adequately for most current applications, the need
for greater I/O bandwidth is making a mess of the once-clean internal PC architecture. In Fig. 3-52, it is clear that the PCI bus is no longer the central element that
holds the parts of the PC together. The bridge chip has taken over part of that role.
The essence of the problem is that increasingly many I/O devices are too fast
for the PCI bus. Cranking up the clock frequency on the bus is not a good solution
because then problems with bus skew, crosstalk between the wires, and capacitance
effects just get worse. Every time an I/O device gets too fast for the PCI bus (like
the graphics card, hard disk, network, etc.), Intel adds a new special port to the
bridge chip to allow that device to bypass the PCI bus. Clearly, this is not a longterm solution either.
Another problem with the PCI bus is that the cards are quite large. Standard
