PCI cards are generally 17.5 cm by 10.7 cm and low-profile cards are 12.0 cm by
3.6 cm. Neither of these fit well in laptop computers and and certainly not in
mobile devices. Manufacturers would like to produce even smaller devices. Also,

224

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

some companies like to repartition the PC, with the CPU and memory in a tiny
sealed box and the hard disk inside the monitor. With PCI cards, doing this is impossible.
Several solutions have been proposed, but the one that won a place in all modern PCs today (in no small part because Intel was behind it) is called PCI Express.
It has little to do with the PCI bus and in fact is not a bus at all, but the marketing
folks did not like letting go of the well-known PCI name. PCs containing it are
now the standard. Let us now see how it works.
The PCI Express Architecture
The heart of the PCI Express solution (often abbreviated PCIe) is to get rid of
the parallel bus with its many masters and slaves and go to a design based on highspeed point-to-point serial connections. This solution represents a radical break
with the ISA/EISA/PCI bus tradition, borrowing many ideas from the world of
local area networking, especially switched Ethernet. The basic idea comes down
to this: deep inside, a PC is a collection of CPU, memory, and I/O controller chips
that need to be interconnected. What PCI Express does is provide a general-purpose switch for connecting chips using serial links. A typical configuration is illustrated in Fig. 3-56.
Level 2
cache

CPU

Bridge
chip

Memory

Switch
Paired serial links

Graphics

Disk

Network

USB 2

Other

Figure 3-56. A typical PCI Express system.

As illustrated in Fig. 3-56, the CPU, memory, and cache are connected to the
bridge chip in the traditional way. What is new here is a switch connected to the

SEC. 3.6

EXAMPLE BUSES

225

bridge (possibly part of the bridge chip itself or integrated directly into the processor). Each I/O chip has a dedicated point-to-point connection to the switch.
Each connection consists of a pair of unidirectional channels, one to the switch and
one from it. Each channel is made up of two wires, one for the signal and one for
ground, to provide high noise immunity during high-speed transmission. This architecture has replaced the old one with a much more uniform model, in which all
devices are treated equally.
The PCI Express architecture differs from the old PCI bus architecture in three
key ways. We have already seen two of them: a centralized switch vs. a multidrop
bus and a the use of narrow serial point-to-point connections vs. a wide parallel
bus. The third difference is more subtle. The conceptual model behind the PCI
bus is that of a bus master issuing a command to a slave to read a word or a block
of words. The PCI Express model is that of a device sending a data packet to another device. The concept of a packet, which consists of a header and a payload,
is taken from the networking world. The header contains control information,
thus eliminating the need for the many control signals present on the PCI bus. The
payload contains the data to be transferred. In effect, a PC with PCI Express is a
miniature packet-switching network.
In addition to these three major breaks with the past, there are also several
minor differences as well. Fourth, an error-detecting code is used on the packets,
providing a higher degree of reliability than on the PCI bus. Fifth, the connection
between a chip and the switch is longer than it was, up to 50 cm, to allow system
partitioning. Sixth, the system is expandable because a device may actually be another switch, allowing a tree of switches. Seventh, devices are hot pluggable,
meaning that they can be added or removed from the system while it is running.
Finally, since the serial connectors are much smaller than the old PCI connectors,
devices and computers can be made much smaller. All in all, PCI Express is a
major departure from the PCI bus.
The PCI Express Protocol Stack
In keeping with the model of a packet-switching network, the PCI Express system has a layered protocol stack. A protocol is a set of rules governing the conversation between two parties. A protocol stack is a hierarchy of protocols that deal
with different issues at different layers. For example, consider a business letter. It
has certain conventions about the placement and content of the letterhead, the recipient’s address, the date, the salutation, the body, the signature, and so on. This
might be thought of as the letter protocol. In addition, there is another set of conventions about the envelope, such as its size, where the sender’s address goes and
its format, where the receiver’s address goes and its format, where the stamp goes,
and so on. These two layers and their protocols are independent. For example, it
is possible to reformat the letter but use the same envelope or vice versa. Layered

226

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

protocols make for a modular and flexible design, and have been widely used in
the world of network software for decades. What is new here is building them into
the ‘‘bus’’ hardware.
The PCI Express protocol stack is shown in Fig. 3-57(a). It is discussed below.
