
CPU
EEPROM
AVCC
AREF

DATABUS

GND
8bit T/C 0

16bit T/C 1

A/D conv.

8bit T/C 2

Analog
comp.

Internal
bandgap

USART 0

SPI

TWI

PORT D (8)

PORT B (8)

PORT C (7)

2

6

RESET
XTAL[1..2]
PD[0..7]

PB[0..7]

PC[0..6]

ADC[6..7]

Figure 3-50. The internal architecture and logical pinout of the ATmega168.

214

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

Instead of address and data pins, the ATmega168 has 27 digital I/O ports, 8
lines in port B and D, and 7 lines in port C. These digital I/O lines are designed to
be connected to I/O peripherals, and each line can be internally configured by
startup software to be an input or an output. For example, when used in a microwave oven, one digital I/O line would be an input from the ‘‘door open’’ sensor.
Another digital I/O line would be an output used to turn the microwave generator
on and off. Software in the ATmega168 would check that the door was closed before turning on the microwave generator. If the door is suddenly opened, the software must kill the power. In practice, hardware interlocks are always present, too.
Optionally, six of the inputs from port C can be configured to be analog I/O.
Analog I/O pins can read the voltage level of an input or set the voltage level of an
output. Extending our microwave oven example, some ovens have a sensor that allows the user to heat food to a given temperature. The temperature sensor would be
connected to a C port input, and software could read the voltage of the sensor and
then convert it to a temperature using a sensor-specific translation function. The
remaining pins on the ATmega168 are the power input (VCC), two ground pins
(GND), and two pins to configure the analog I/O circuitry (AREF, AVCC).
The internal architecture of the ATmega168, like that of the OMAP4430, is a
system-on-a-chip with a rich array of internal devices and memory. The
ATmega168 comes with up to 16 KB of internal flash memory, for storage of infrequently changing nonvolatile information such as program instructions. It also includes up to 1 KB of EEPROM, which is nonvolatile memory that can be written
by software. The EEPROM stores system-configuration data. Again, using our
microwave example, the EEPROM would store a bit indicating whether the microwave displayed time in 12- or 24-hour format. The ATmega168 also incorporates
up to 1 KB of internal SRAM, where software can store temporary variables.
The internal processor runs the AVR instruction set, which is composed of 131
instructions, each 16 bits in length. The processor is an 8-bit processor, which
means that it operates on 8-bit data values, and internally its registers are 8 bits in
size. The instruction set incorporates special instructions that allow the 8-bit processor to efficiently operate on larger data types. For example, to perform 16-bit or
larger additions, the processor provides the ‘‘add-with-carry’’ instruction, which
adds two values plus the carry out of the previous addition. The remaining internal
components include the real-time clock and a variety of interface logic, including
support for serial links, pulse-width-modulated (PWM) links, I2C (Inter-IC bus)
link, and analog and digital I/O controllers.

3.6 EXAMPLE BUSES
Buses are the glue that hold computer systems together. In this section we will
take a close look at some popular buses: the PCI bus and the Universal Serial Bus.
The PCI bus is the primary I/O peripheral bus used today in PCs. It comes in two

SEC. 3.6

EXAMPLE BUSES

215

forms, the older PCI bus, and the new and much faster PCI Express (PCIe) bus.
The Universal Serial Bus is an increasingly popular I/O bus for low-speed peripherals such as mice and keyboards. A second and third version of the USB bus run
at much higher speeds. In the following sections, we will look at each of these
