buses in turn to see how they work.

3.6.1 The PCI Bus
On the original IBM PC, most applications were text based. Gradually, with
the introduction of Windows, graphical user interfaces came into use. None of
these applications put much strain on early system buses such as the ISA bus.
However, as time went on and many applications, especially multimedia games,
began to use computers to display full-screen, full-motion video, the situation
changed radically.
Let us make a simple calculation. Consider a 1024 × 768 color video with 3
bytes/pixel. One frame contains 2.25 MB of data. For smooth motion, at least 30
screens/sec are needed, for a data rate of 67.5 MB/sec. In fact, it is worse than this,
since to display a video from a hard disk, CD-ROM, or DVD, the data must pass
from the disk drive over the bus to the memory. Then for the display, the data must
travel over the bus again to the graphics adapter. Thus, we need a bus bandwidth
of 135 MB/sec for the video alone, not counting the bandwidth that the CPU and
other devices need.
The PCI bus’ predecessor, the ISA bus, ran at a maximum rate of 8.33 MHz
and could transfer 2 bytes per cycle, for a maximum bandwidth of 16.7 MB/sec.
The enhanced ISA bus, called the EISA bus, could move 4 bytes per cycle, to
achieve 33.3 MB/sec. Clearly, neither of these approached what is needed for fullscreen video.
With modern full HD video the situation is even worse. It requires
1920 × 1080 frames at 30 frames/sec for a data rate of 155 MB/sec (or 310 MB/sec
if the data have to traverse the bus twice). Clearly, the EISA bus does not even
come close to handling this.
In 1990, Intel saw this coming and designed a new bus with a far higher bandwidth than the EISA bus. It was called the PCI bus (Peripheral Component
Interconnect bus). To encourage its use, Intel patented the PCI bus and then put
all the patents into the public domain, so any company could build peripherals for
it without having to pay royalties. Intel also formed an industry consortium, the
PCI Special Interest Group, to manage the future of the PCI bus. As a result, the
PCI bus became extremely popular. Virtually every Intel-based computer since the
Pentium has a PCI bus, and many other computers do, too. The PCI bus is covered
in gory detail in Shanley and Anderson (1999) and Solari and Willse (2004).
The original PCI bus transferred 32 bits per cycle and ran at 33 MHz (30-nsec
cycle time) for a total bandwidth of 133 MB/sec. In 1993, PCI 2.0 was introduced,

216

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

and in 1995, PCI 2.1 came out. PCI 2.2 has features for mobile computers (mostly
for saving battery power). The PCI bus runs at up to 66 MHz and can handle
64-bit transfers, for a total bandwidth of 528 MB/sec. With this kind of capacity,
full-screen, full-motion video is doable (assuming the disk and the rest of the system are up to the job). In any event, the PCI bus will not be the bottleneck.
Even though 528 MB/sec sounds pretty fast, the PCI bus still had two problems. First, it was not good enough for a memory bus. Second, it was not compatible with all those old ISA cards out there. The solution Intel thought of was to design computers with three or more buses, as shown in Fig. 3-51. Here we see that
the CPU can talk to the main memory on a special memory bus, and that an ISA
bus can be connected to the PCI bus. This arrangement met all requirements, and
as a consequence it was widely used in the 1990s.
Local bus

Cache bus

Level 2
cache

Memory bus

PCI
bridge

CPU

Main
memory
PCI bus

SCSI

USB

ISA
bridge

IDE
disk

Graphics
adaptor

Available
PCI slot

Monitor
Mouse

Modem

Keyboard

ISA bus

Sound
card

Printer

Available
ISA slot
