11. Draw the logic diagram of a 2-bit demultiplexer, a circuit whose single input line is
steered to one of the four output lines depending on the state of the two control lines.
12. What does this circuit do?

A
B

C
D

13. A common chip is a 4-bit adder. Four of these chips can be hooked up to form a 16-bit
adder. How many pins would you expect the 4-bit adder chip to have? Why?
14. An n-bit adder can be constructed by cascading n full adders in series, with the carry
into stage i, C i , coming from the output of stage i − 1. The carry into stage 0, C 0 , is 0.
If each stage takes T nsec to produce its sum and carry, the carry into stage i will not be
valid until iT nsec after the start of the addition. For large n the time required for the

CHAP. 3

PROBLEMS

239

carry to ripple through to the high-order stage may be unacceptably long. Design an
adder that works faster. Hint: Each C i can be expressed in terms of the operand bits
Ai − 1 and Bi − 1 as well as the carry C i − 1 . Using this relation it is possible to express C i
as a function of the inputs to stages 0 to i − 1, so all the carries can be generated simultaneously.
15. If all the gates in Fig. 3-18 have a propagation delay of 1 nsec, and all other delays can
be ignored, what is the earliest time a circuit using this design can be sure of having a
valid output bit?
16. The ALU of Fig. 3-19 is capable of doing 8-bit 2’s complement additions. Is it also capable of doing 2’s complement subtractions? If so, explain how. If not, modify it to be
able to do subtractions.
17. A 16-bit ALU is built up of 16 1-bit ALUs, each one having an add time of 10 nsec. If
there is an additional 1-nsec delay for propagation from one ALU to the next, how long
does it take for the result of a 16-bit add to appear?
18. Sometimes it is useful for an 8-bit ALU such as Fig. 3-19 to generate the constant −1
as output. Give two different ways this can be done. For each way, specify the values
of the six control signals.
19. What is the quiescent state of the S and R inputs to an SR latch built of two
gates?

NAND

20. The circuit of Fig. 3-25 is a flip-flop that is triggered on the rising edge of the clock.
Modify this circuit to produce a flip-flop that is triggered on the falling edge of the
clock.
21. The 4 × 3 memory of Fig. 3-28 uses 22 AND gates and three OR gates. If the circuit
were to be expanded to 256 × 8, how many of each would be needed?
22. To help meet the payments on your new personal computer, you have taken up consulting for fledgling SSI chip manufacturers. One of your clients is thinking about putting
out a chip containing four D flip-flops, each containing both Q and Q, on request of a
potentially important customer. The proposed design has all four clock signals ganged
together, also on request. Neither preset nor clear is present. Your assignment is to
give a professional evaluation of the design.
23. As more and more memory is squeezed onto a single chip, the number of pins needed
to address it also increases. It is often inconvenient to have large numbers of address
pins on a chip. Devise a way to address 2n words of memory using fewer than n pins.
24. A computer with a 32-bit wide data bus uses 1M × 1 dynamic RAM memory chips.
What is the smallest memory (in bytes) that this computer can have?
25. Referring to the timing diagram of Fig. 3-38, suppose that you slowed the clock down
to a period of 20 nsec instead of 10 nsec as shown but the timing constraints remained
unchanged. How much time would the memory have to get the data onto the bus during T 3 after MREQ was asserted, in the worst case?
26. Again referring to Fig. 3-38, suppose that the clock remained at 100 MHz, but T DS was
increased to 4 nsec. Could 10-nsec memory chips be used?

240

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

27. In Fig. 3-38(b), T ML is specified to be at least 2 nsec. Can you envision a chip in
which it is negative? Specifically, could the CPU assert MREQ before the address was
stable? Why or why not?
28. Assume that the block transfer of Fig. 3-42 were done on the bus of Fig. 3-38. How
much more bandwidth is obtained by using a block transfer over individual transfers
for long blocks? Now assume that the bus is 32 bits wide instead of 8 bits wide.
Answer the question again.
29. Denote the transition times of the address lines of Fig. 3-39 as T A1 and T A2 , and the
transition times of MREQ as T MREQ1 and T MREQ2 , and so on. Write down all the
inequalities implied by the full handshake.
30. Multicore chips, with multiple CPUs on the same die, are becoming popular. What advantages do they have over a system consisting of multiple PCs connected by Ethernet?
31. Why have multicore chips suddenly appeared? Are there technological factors that
have paved the way? Does Moore’s law play a role here?
32. What is the difference between the memory bus and the PCI bus?
33. Most 32-bit buses permit 16-bit reads and writes. Is there any ambiguity about where
to place the data? Discuss.
34. Many CPUs have a special bus cycle type for interrupt acknowledge. Why?
35. A 64-bit computer with a 400-MHz bus requires four cycles to read a 64-bit word.
How much bus bandwidth does the CPU consume in the worst case, that is, assuming
back-to-back reads or writes all the time?
36. A 64-bit computer with a 400-MHz bus requires four cycles to read a 64-bit word.
How much bus bandwidth does the CPU consume in the worst case, that is, assuming
back-to-back reads or writes all the time?
37. A 32-bit CPU with address lines A2–A31 requires all memory references to be
aligned. That is, words have to be addressed at multiples of 4 bytes, and half-words
have to be addressed at even bytes. Bytes can be anywhere. How many legal combinations are there for memory reads, and how many pins are needed to express them?
Give two answers and make a case for each one.
38. Modern CPU chips have one, two, or even three levels of cache on chip. Why are multiple levels of cache needed?
39. Suppose that a CPU has a level 1 cache and a level 2 cache, with access times of 1 nsec
and 2 nsec, respectively. The main memory access time is 10 nsec. If 20% of the accesses are level 1 cache hits and 60% are level 2 cache hits, what is the average access
