A15

CS
2K × 8
EPROM

CS
2K × 8
RAM

CS
PI0

(a)
A0
Address bus
A15

CS
2K × 8
EPROM

CS
2K × 8
RAM

(b)

Figure 3-61. (a) Full address decoding. (b) Partial address decoding.

CS
PI0

SEC. 3.8

SUMMARY

237

flip-flops for memories with any word size desired. Memories are available as
RAM, ROM, PROM, EPROM, EEPROM, and flash. Static RAMs need not be
refreshed; they keep their stored values as long as the power remains on. Dynamic
RAMs, on the other hand, must be refreshed periodically to compensate for leakage from the little capacitors on the chip.
The components of a computer system are connected by buses. Many, but not
all, of the pins on a typical CPU chip directly drive one bus line. The bus lines can
be divided into address, data, and control lines. Synchronous buses are driven by a
master clock. Asynchronous buses use full handshaking to synchronize the slave
to the master.
The Core i7 is an example of a modern CPU. Modern systems using it have a
memory bus, a PCIe bus, and a USB bus. The PCIe interconnect is the dominant
way to connect the internal parts of a computer at high speeds. The ARM is also a
modern high-end CPU but is intended for embedded systems and mobile devices
where low power consumption is important. The Atmel ATmega168 is an example
of a low-priced chip good for small, inexpensive appliances and many other pricesensitive applications.
Switches, lights, printers, and many other I/O devices can be interfaced to
computers using parallel I/O interfaces. These chips can be configured to be part
of the I/O space or the memory space, as needed. They can be fully decoded or
partially decoded, depending on the application.

PROBLEMS
1. Analog circuits are subject to noise that can distort their output. Are digital circuits
immune to noise? Discuss your answer.
2. A logician drives into a drive-in restaurant and says, ‘‘I want a hamburger or a hot dog
and french fries.’’ Unfortunately, the cook flunked out of sixth grade and does not
know (or care) whether ‘‘and’’ has precedence over ‘‘or.’’ As far as he is concerned,
one interpretation is as good as the other. Which of the following cases are valid interpretations of the order? (Note that in English ‘‘or’’ means ‘‘exclusive or.’’)
a. Just a hamburger.
b. Just a hot dog.
c. Just french fries.
d. A hot dog and french fries.
e. A hamburger and french fries.
f. A hot dog and a hamburger.
g. All three.
h. Nothing—the logician goes hungry for being a wiseguy.

238

THE DIGITAL LOGIC LEVEL

CHAP. 3

3. A missionary lost in Southern California stops at a fork in the road. He knows that two
motorcycle gangs inhabit the area, one of which always tells the truth and one of which
always lies. He wants to know which road leads to Disneyland. What question should
he ask?
4. Use a truth table to show that X = (X AND Y) OR (X AND NOT Y).
5. There exist four Boolean functions of a single variable and 16 functions of two variables. How many functions of three variables are there? Of n variables?
6. There exist four Boolean functions of a single variable and 16 functions of two variables. How many functions of four variables are there?
7. Show how the AND function can be constructed from two NAND gates.
8. Using the three-variable multiplexer chip of Fig. 3-12, implement a function whose
output is the parity of the inputs, that is, the output is 1 if and only if an even number
of inputs are 1.
9. Put on your thinking cap. The three-variable multiplexer chip of Fig. 3-12 is actually
capable of computing an arbitrary function of four Boolean variables. Describe how,
and as an example, draw the logic diagram for the function that is 0 if the English word
for the truth-table row has an even number of letters, 1 if it has an odd number of letters (e.g., 0000 = zero = four letters → 0; 0111 = seven = five letters → 1; 1101 = thirteen = eight letters → 0). Hint: If we call the fourth input variable D, the eight input
lines may be wired to V cc , ground, D, or D.
10. Draw the logic diagram of a 2-bit encoder, a circuit with four input lines, exactly one
of which is high at any instant, and two output lines whose 2-bit binary value tells
which input is high.
