and ISUB) as well as two logical (Boolean) operations (IAND and IOR) can be performed using the two top words on the stack as operands. In all the arithmetic and
logical operations, two words are popped from the stack and the result pushed back
onto it. Four branch instructions are provided, one unconditional (GOTO) and three
conditional ones (IFEQ, IFLT, and IF ICMPEQ). All the branch instructions, if taken,
adjust the value of PC by the size of their (16-bit signed) offset, which follows the
opcode in the instruction. This offset is added to the address of the opcode. There

SEC. 4.2

AN EXAMPLE ISA: IJVM

263

are also IJVM instructions for swapping the top two words on the stack (SWAP),
duplicating the top word (DUP), and removing it (POP).
Some instructions have multiple formats, allowing a short form for commonly
used versions. In IJVM we have included two of the various mechanisms JVM
uses to accomplish this. In one case we have skipped the short form in favor of the
more general one. In another case we show how the prefix instruction WIDE can be
used to modify the ensuing instruction.
Finally, there is an instruction (INVOKEVIRTUAL) for invoking another method,
and another instruction (IRETURN) for exiting the method and returning control to
the method that invoked it. Due to the complexity of the mechanism we have
slightly simplified the definition, making it possible to produce a straightforward
mechanism for invoking a call and return. The restriction is that, unlike Java, we
allow a method to invoke only a method existing within its own object. This
restriction severely cripples the object orientation but allows us to present a much
simpler mechanism, by avoiding the requirement to locate the method dynamically.
(If you are not familiar with object-oriented programming, you can safely ignore
this remark. What we have done is turn Java back into a nonobject-oriented language, such as C or Pascal.) On all computers except JVM, the address of the procedure to call is determined directly by the CALL instruction, so our approach is actually the normal case, not the exception.
The mechanism for invoking a method is as follows. First, the callr pushes
onto the stack a reference (pointer) to the object to be called. (This reference is not
needed in IJVM since no other object may be specified, but it is retained for consistency with JVM.) In Fig. 4-12(a) this reference is indicated by OBJREF. Then
the caller pushes the method’s parameters onto the stack, in this example, Parameter 1, Parameter 2, and Parameter 3. Finally, INVOKEVIRTUAL is executed.
The INVOKEVIRTUAL instruction includes a displacement which indicates the
position in the constant pool that contains the start address within the nethod area
for the method being invoked. However, while the method code resides at the location pointed to by this pointer, the first 4 bytes in the method area contain special
data. The first 2 bytes are interpreted as a 16-bit integer indicating the number of
parameters for the method (the parameters themselves have previously been
pushed onto the stack). For this count, OBJREF is counted as a parameter: parameter 0. This 16-bit integer, together with the value of SP, provides the location of
OBJREF. Note that LV points to OBJREF rather than the first real parameter. The
choice of where LV points is somewhat arbitrary.
The second 2 bytes in the method area are interpreted as another 16-bit integer
indicating the size of the local variable area for the method being invoked. This is
necessary because a new stack will be established for the method, beginning immediately above the local variable frame. Finally, the fifth byte in the method area
contains the first opcode to be executed.
The actual sequence that occurs for INVOKEVIRTUAL is as follows and is
depicted in Fig. 4-12. The two unsigned index bytes that follow the opcode are

264

THE MICROARCHITECTURE LEVEL

CHAP. 4
Stack after
INVOKEVIRTUAL
Caller's LV
Caller's PC
Space for
caller's local
variables

Stack before
INVOKEVIRTUAL
Pushed
parameters

Caller's
local
variable
frame

Parameter 3
Parameter 2
Parameter 1
OBJREF
Previous LV
Previous PC

SP

Caller's
local
variables
Parameter 2
Parameter 1
Link ptr
(a)

SP

Stack base
after
INVOKEVIRTUAL

Stack base
before
INVOKEVIRTUAL
LV

