the instructions enter the Re (Rename) stage where the registers accessed are
renamed to eliminate WAR and WAW hazards during out-of-order execution. This
stage contains the rename table which records which physical register currently
holds all architectural registers. Using this table, any input register can be easily
renamed. The output register must be given a new physical register, which is taken
from a pool of unused physical registers. The assigned physical register will be in
use by the instruction until it retires.
Next, instructions enter the Iss (Instruction Issue) stage, where they are
dropped into the instruction issue queue. The issue queue watches for instructions
whose inputs are all ready. When ready, their register inputs are acquired (from the
physical register file or the bypass bus), and then the instruction is sent to the execution stages. Like the Core i7, the Cortex A9 potentially issues instructions out
of program order. Up to four instructions can be issued each cycle. The choice of
instructions is constrained by the functional units available.
The Ex (Execute) stages are where instructions are actually executed. Most
arithmetic, Boolean, and shift instructions use the integer ALUs and complete in
one cycle. Loads and stores take two cycles (if they hit in the L1 cache), and multiplies take three cycles. The Ex stages contain multiple functional units, which are:
1. Integer ALU 1.
2. Integer ALU 2.
3. Multiply unit.
4. Floating-point and SIMD vector ALU (optional with VFP and NEON
support).
5. Load and store unit.
Conditional branch instructions are also processed in the first Ex stage and their direction (branch/no branch) is determined. In the event of a misprediction, a signal
is sent back to the Fe1 stage and the pipeline voided.

SEC. 4.6

333

EXAMPLES OF THE MICROARCHITECTURE LEVEL

Stage
Level 1
inst cache

Fe1
Fe2

Branch
predictor

Fast-loop
look-aside

Instruction issue unit

Instruction
queue

Fe3

Id1
Instruction
decoding
Id2

Re

Instruction renaming

Iss

Ex1

Ex2

Instruction issue queue

ALU 1

ALU 2

Load-store unit

Mult

FPU/
NEON

Level 1
data cache
Level 2
unified
cache

Ex3

…
WB

Retirement

Figure 4-49. A simplified representation of the OMAP4430’s Cortex A9 pipeline.

After completing execution, instructions enter the WB (WriteBack) stage
where each instruction updates the physical register file immediately. Potentially
later, when the instruction is the oldest one in flight, it will write its register result
to the architectural register file. If a trap or interrupt occurs, it is these values, not
those in the physical registers, that are made visible. The act of storing the register
in the architectural file is equivalent to retirement in the Core i7. In addition, in the
