On earlier Intel architectures, all opcodes were 1 byte, though the concept of a
prefix byte was used extensively for modifying some instructions. A prefix byte is
an extra opcode stuck onto the front of an instruction to change its action. The
WIDE instruction in IJVM is an example of a prefix byte. Unfortunately, at some
point during the evolution, Intel ran out of opcodes, so one opcode, 0xFF, was designated as an escape code to permit a second instruction byte.

368

THE INSTRUCTION SET ARCHITECTURE LEVEL
Bytes

Bits

0-5

1-2

0-1

0-1

PREFIX

OPCODE

MODE

SIB

6

1 1

Bits

INSTRUCTION

0-4

0-4

DISPLACEMENT

2

3

SCALE

INDEX

CHAP. 5

IMMEDIATE

3
BASE

Which operand is source?
Byte/word
Bits

2

3

3

MOD

REG

R/M

Figure 5-13. The Core i7 instruction formats.

The individual bits in the Core i7 opcodes do not give much information about
the instruction. The only structure in the opcode field is the use of the low-order
bit in some instructions to indicate byte/word, and the use of the adjoining bit to indicate whether the memory address (if it is present) is the source or the destination.
Thus in general, the opcode must be fully decoded to determine what class of operation is to be performed—and thus how long the instruction is. This makes
high-performance implementations difficult, since extensive decoding is necessary
before it can even be determined where the next instruction starts.
Following the opcode byte in most instructions that reference an operand in
memory is a second byte that tells all about the operand. These 8 bits are split up
into a 2-bit MOD field and two 3-bit register fields, REG and R/M. Sometimes the
first 3 bits of this byte are used as an extension for the opcode, giving a total 11
bits for the opcode. However, the 2-bit mode field means that there are only four
ways to address operands and one of the operands must always be a register. Logically, any of EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, ESI, EDI, EBP, ESP should be specifiable as either register, but the encoding rules prohibit some combinations and use them for
special cases. Some modes require an additional byte, called SIB (Scale, Index,
Base), giving a further specification. This scheme is not ideal, but a compromise
given the competing demands of backward compatibility and the desire to add new
features not originally envisioned.
In addition to all this, some instructions have 1, 2, or 4 more bytes specifying a
memory address (displacement) and possibly another 1, 2, or 4 bytes containing a
constant (immediate operand).

5.3.4 The OMAP4430 ARM CPU Instruction Formats
The OMAP4430 ARM ISA consists of both 16- and 32-bit instructions,
aligned in memory. Instructions are generally simple, specifying only a single action. A typical arithmetic instruction specifies two registers to supply the source

