8 bits wide. In essence the only data type that is really supported by the hardware
for arithmetic operations is the 8-bit byte, as shown in Fig. 5-8.
Type

8 Bits

Signed integer

×

Unsigned integer

×

16 Bits

32 Bits

64 Bits

×

Binary coded decimal integer
Floating point
Figure 5-8. The ATmega168 numeric data types. Supported types are marked
with ×.

362

THE INSTRUCTION SET ARCHITECTURE LEVEL

CHAP. 5

To facilitate memory accesses, the ATmega168 also includes limited support
for 16-bit unsigned pointers. The 16-bit pointers X, Y, and Z, can be formed from
the concatenation of 8-bit register pairs R26/R27, R28/R29, and R30/R31, respectively. When a load uses X, Y, or Z as an address operand, the processor will
also optionally increment or decrement the value as needed.

5.3 INSTRUCTION FORMATS
An instruction consists of an opcode, usually along with some additional information such as where operands come from and where results go to. The general
subject of specifying where the operands are (i.e., their addresses) is called
addressing and will be discussed in detail later in this section.
Figure 5-9 shows several possible formats for level 2 instructions. An instruction always has an opcode to tell what the instruction does. There can be zero,
one, two, or three addresses present.
OPCODE

OPCODE

(a)

OPCODE

ADDRESS1 ADDRESS2

ADDRESS
(b)

OPCODE ADDR1 ADDR2 ADDR3

(c)

(d)

Figure 5-9. Four common instruction formats: (a) Zero-address instruction.
(b) One-address instruction (c) Two-address instruction. (d) Three-address
instruction.

On some machines, all instructions have the same length; on others there may
be many different lengths. Instructions may be shorter than, the same length as, or
longer than the word length. Having all the instructions be the same length is simpler and makes decoding easier but often wastes space, since all instructions then
have to be as long as the longest one. Other trade-offs are also possible. Figure
5-10 shows some possible relationships between instruction length and word
length.

5.3.1 Design Criteria for Instruction Formats
When a computer design team has to choose instruction formats for its machine, they must consider a number of factors. The difficulty of this decision
should not be underestimated. The decision about the instruction format must be
made early in the design of a new computer. If the computer is commercially successful, the instruction set may survive for 40 years or more. The ability to add

SEC. 5.3

363

INSTRUCTION FORMATS
1 Word

1 Word

Instruction

Instruction

Instruction

Instruction

Instruction

Instruction

