dddd

cQQQ

Load/store: Id/st(c) X/Y/Z+Q, Rd

5

11cc

KKKK

KKKK

KKKK

Branch: br(c) PC + K

31
6

1001

0
010K

KKKK

11cK

KKKK

KKKK

KKKK

KKKK

Call/jmp: call/jmp(c) #K

Figure 5-15. The ATmega168 AVR instruction formats.

number of opcode bits is cut in half, allowing only four instructions to use this format (SUBCI, SUBI, ORI, and ANDI).
Format 4 encodes load and store instruction, which includes a 6-bit unsigned
immediate operand. The base register is a fixed register not specified in the instruction encoding because it is implied by the load/store opcode.
Formats 5 and 6 are used for jumps and procedure calls. The first format includes a 12-bit signed immediate value that is added to the instruction’s PC value
to compute the target of the instruction. The last format expands the offset to 22
bits, by making the AVR instruction 32 bits in size.

5.4 ADDRESSING
Most instructions have operands, so some way is needed to specify where they
are. This subject, which we will now discuss, is called addressing.

5.4.1 Addressing Modes
Up until now, we have paid little attention to how the bits of an address field
are interpreted to find the operand. It is now time to investigate this subject, called
address modes. As we shall see, there are many ways to do it.

372

THE INSTRUCTION SET ARCHITECTURE LEVEL

CHAP. 5

5.4.2 Immediate Addressing
The simplest way for an instruction to specify an operand is for the address
part of the instruction actually to contain the operand itself rather than an address
or other information describing where the operand is. Such an operand is called an
immediate operand because it is automatically fetched from memory at the same
time the instruction itself is fetched; hence it is immediately available for use. A
possible immediate instruction for loading register R1 with the constant 4 is shown
in Fig. 5-16.
MOV

R1

4

Figure 5-16. An immediate instruction for loading 4 into register 1.

Immediate addressing has the virtue of not requiring an extra memory reference to fetch the operand. It has the disadvantage that only a constant can be supplied this way. Also, the number of values is limited by the size of the field. Still,
many architectures use this technique for specifying small integer constants.

5.4.3 Direct Addressing
A method for specifying an operand in memory is just to give its full address.
This mode is called direct addressing. Like immediate addressing, direct addressing is restricted in its use: the instruction will always access exactly the same
memory location. So while the value can change, the location cannot. Thus direct
addressing can only be used to access global variables whose address is known at
compile time. Nevertheless, many programs have global variables, so this mode is
widely used. The details of how the computer knows which addresses are immediate and which are direct will be discussed later.

5.4.4 Register Addressing
Register addressing is conceptually the same as direct addressing but specifies
a register instead of a memory location. Because registers are so important (due to
fast access and short addresses) this addressing mode is the most common one on
most computers. Many compilers go to great lengths to determine which variables
will be accessed most often (for example, a loop index) and put these variables in
registers.
This addressing mode is known simply as register mode. In load/store architectures such as the OMAP4420 ARM architecture, nearly all instructions use this
addressing mode exclusively. The only time this addressing mode is not used is
