Relative
address
0
4

Segment type and protection
Privilege level (0-3)
0 : Segment is absent from memory
1 : Segment is present in memory

Figure 6-13. A Core i7 code segment descriptor. Data segments differ slightly.

The format of the selector has been cleverly chosen to make locating the descriptor easy. First either the LDT or GDT is selected, based on selector bit 2.
Then the selector is copied to an MMU scratch register, and the 3 low-order bits
are set to 0, effectively multiplying the 13-bit selector number by eight. Finally,
the address of either the LDT or GDT table (kept in internal MMU registers) is
added to it, to give a direct pointer to the descriptor. For example, selector 72
refers to entry 9 in the GDT, which is located at address GDT + 72.
Let us trace the steps by which a (selector, offset) pair is converted to a physical address. As soon as the hardware knows which segment register is being used,
it can find the complete descriptor corresponding to that selector in its internal registers. If the segment does not exist (selector 0) or is currently not in memory (P is
0), a trap occurs. The former case is a programming error; the latter case requires
the operating system to go get it.

SEC. 6.1

457

VIRTUAL MEMORY

It then checks to see if the offset is beyond the end of the segment, in which
case a trap also occurs. Logically, there should simply be a 32-bit field in the descriptor giving the size of the segment, but only 20 bits are available, so a different
scheme is used. If the G (Granularity) field is 0, the LIMIT field is the exact segment size, up to 1 MB. If it is 1, the LIMIT field gives the segment size in pages instead of bytes. The Core i7 page size is never smaller than 4 KB, so 20 bits is
enough for segments up to 232 bytes.
Assuming that the segment is in memory and the offset is in range, the Core i7
then adds the 32-bit BASE field in the descriptor to the offset to form what is called
a linear address, as shown in Fig. 6-14. The BASE field is broken up into three
pieces and spread all over the descriptor for backward compatibility with the
80286, in which the BASE is only 24 bits. In effect, the BASE field allows each
segment to start at an arbitrary place within the 32-bit linear address space.
Selector

Offset
Descriptor
Base address

+

Limit
Other fields

32-Bit linear address

Figure 6-14. Conversion of a (selector, offset) pair to a linear address.

If paging is disabled (by a bit in a global control register), the linear address is
interpreted as the physical address and sent to the memory for the read or write.
Thus with paging disabled, we have a pure segmentation scheme, with each segment’s base address given in its descriptor. Segments are permitted to overlap,
incidentally, probably because it would be too much trouble and take too much
time to verify that they were all disjoint.
On the other hand, if paging is enabled, the linear address is interpreted as a
virtual address and mapped onto the physical address using page tables, pretty
much as in our examples. The only complication is that with a 32-bit virtual address and a 4-KB page, a segment might contain 1 million pages, so a two-level
mapping is used to reduce the page-table size for small segments.
Each running program has a page directory consisting of 1024 32-bit entries.
It is located at an address pointed to by a global register. Each entry in this directory points to a page table also containing 1024 32-bit entries. The page-table entries point to page frames. The scheme is shown in Fig. 6-15.

458

THE OPERATING SYSTEM MACHINE LEVEL

Bits

10

Linear address
10

12

DIR

PAGE

OFF

CHAP. 6

(a)
Page directory

Page table

Page frame

Word selected
DIR

PAGE
OFF
(b)
