contain a mixture of different types.

SEC. 6.1

451

VIRTUAL MEMORY
20K
16K
12K

Symbol
table

8K
Source
text

4K
0
Segment
0

Segment
1

Constant
table
Segment
2

Parse
tree
Segment
3

Call
stack

Segment
4

Figure 6-8. A segmented memory allows each table to grow or shrink independently of the other tables.

A segmented memory has other advantages besides simplifying the handling of
data structures that are growing or shrinking. If each procedure occupies a separate segment, with address 0 as its starting address, the linking up of procedures
compiled separately is greatly simplified. After all the procedures that constitute a
program have been compiled and linked up, a procedure call to the procedure in
segment n will use the two-part address (n, 0) to address word 0 (the entry point).
If the procedure in segment n is subsequently modified and recompiled, no
other procedures need be changed (because no starting addresses have been modified), even if the new version is larger than the old one. With a one-dimensional
memory, the procedures are normally packed tightly next to each other, with no address space between them. Consequently, changing one procedure’s size can affect
the starting address of other, unrelated, procedures. This, in turn, requires modifying all procedures that call any of the moved procedures, in order to incorporate
their new starting addresses. If a program contains hundreds of procedures, this
process can be costly.
Segmentation also facilitates sharing procedures or data among several programs. If a computer has several programs running in parallel (either true or simulated parallel processing), all of which use certain library procedures, it is wasteful
of main memory to provide each one with its own private copy. If we make each
procedure a separate segment, they can be shared easily, thus eliminating the need
for more than one physical copy of any shared procedure to be in main memory.
As a result, memory is saved.
Because each segment forms a logical entity of which the programmer is
aware, such as a procedure, or an array, or a stack, different segments can have different kinds of protection. A procedure segment could be specified as execute
only, prohibiting attempts to read from it or store into it. A floating-point array
could be specified as read/write but not execute, and attempts to branch to it would
be caught. Such protection is frequently helpful in catching programming errors.

452

THE OPERATING SYSTEM MACHINE LEVEL

CHAP. 6

Try to understand why protection makes sense in a segmented memory but not
in a one-dimensional (i.e., linear) paged memory. In a segmented memory the user
is aware of what is in each segment. Normally, a segment would not contain both a
procedure and a stack, for example, but one or the other. Since each segment contains only one type of object, the segment can have the protection appropriate for
that particular type. Paging and segmentation are compared in Fig. 6-9.
Consideration

Paging

Need the programmer be aware of it?

No

How many linear addresses spaces are there?

1

Segmentation
Yes
Many

Can virtual address space exceed memory size? Yes

Yes

Can variable-sized tables be handled easily?

No
