
Track 19

Sector 9

File 9

Block 2:

Track 11

Sector 2

File 10

Block 3:

Track 77

Sector 0

CHAP. 6

Figure 6-23. A user file directory and the contents of a typical entry in a file directory.

parallel, certain virtual instructions are needed. These instructions will be discussed in the following sections.
The laws of physics provide yet another reason for the current interest in parallel processing. According to Einstein’s special theory of relativity, it is impossible
to transmit electrical signals faster than the speed of light, which is nearly 1 ft/nsec
in vacuum, less in copper wire or optical fiber. This limit has important implications for computer organization. For example, if a CPU needs data from the main
memory 1 ft away, it will take at least 1 nsec for the request to arrive at the memory and another nanosecond for the reply to get back to the CPU. Consequently,
subnanosecond computers will need to be extremely tiny. An alternative approach
to speeding up computers is to build machines with many CPUs. A computer with
a thousand 1-nsec CPUs may (in theory) have the same computing power as one
CPU with a cycle time of 0.001 nsec, but the former may be much easier and
cheaper to construct. Parallel computing is discussed in detail in Chap. 8.
On a computer with more than one CPU, each of several cooperating processes
can be assigned to its own CPU, to allow the processes to progress simultaneously.
If only one processor is available, the effect of parallel processing can be simulated
by having the processor run each process in turn for a short time. In other words,
the processor can be shared among several processes.
Figure 6-24 shows the difference between true parallel processing, with more
than one physical processor, and simulated parallel processing, with only one physical processor. Even when parallel processing is simulated, it is useful to regard
each process as having its own dedicated virtual processor. The same communication problems that arise when there is true parallel processing arise also in the simulated case. In both cases, debugging the problems is very difficult.

SEC. 6.4

OSM-LEVEL INSTRUCTIONS FOR PARALLEL PROCESSING

473

Process 3 waiting for CPU
Process 3
Process 3
Process 2
Process 2
Process 1
Process 1
Process 1 running
Time

Time

(a)

(b)

Figure 6-24. (a) True parallel processing with multiple CPUs. (b) Parallel processing simulated by switching one CPU among three processes.

6.4.1 Process Creation
When a program is to be executed, it must run as part of some process. This
process, like all others, is characterized by a state and an address space through
which the program and data can be accessed. The state includes at the very least
the program counter, a program status word, a stack pointer, and the general registers.
Most modern operating systems allow processes to be created and terminated
dynamically. To take full advantage of this feature to achieve parallel processing, a
system call to create a new process is needed. This system call may just make a
clone of the called, or it may allow the creating process to specify the initial state
of the new process, including its program, data, and starting address.
In some cases, the creating (parent) process maintains partial or even complete
control over the created (child) process. To this end, virtual instructions exist for a
parent to stop, restart, examine, and terminate its children. In other cases, a parent
has less control over its children: once a process has been created, there is no way
for the parent to forcibly stop, restart, examine, or terminate it. The two processes
then run independently of one another.

6.4.2 Race Conditions
In many cases, parallel processes need to communicate and synchronize in
order to get their work done. In this section, process synchronization will be examined and some of the difficulties explained by means of a detailed example. A
solution to these difficulties will be given in the following section.

474

THE OPERATING SYSTEM MACHINE LEVEL

CHAP. 6

Consider a situation consisting of two independent processes, process 1 and
process 2, which communicate via a shared buffer in main memory. For simplicity
we will call process 1 the producer and process 2 the consumer. The producer
computes prime numbers and puts them into the buffer one at a time. The consumer removes them from the buffer one at a time and prints them.
