OpenFileMapping

Open a previously created file-mapping object

Figure 6-34. The principal Windows 7 API calls for managing virtual memory

The first four API functions are self-explanatory. The next two give a process
the ability to hardwire some number of pages in memory so they will not be paged
out and to undo this property. A real-time program might need this ability, for example. Only programs run on behalf of the system administrator may pin pages in
memory. And a limit is enforced by the operating system to prevent even these
processes from getting too greedy. Although not shown in Fig. 6-34, Windows 7
also has API functions to allow a process to access the virtual memory of a different process over which it has been given control (i.e., for which it has a handle).
The last four API functions listed are for managing memory-mapped files. To
map a file, a file-mapping object must first be created, with CreateFileMapping.
This function returns a handle to the file-mapping object and optionally enters a
name for it into the file system so another process can use it. The next two functions map and unmap files, respectively. A mapped file is (part of) a disk file that
can be read from or written to just by accessing the virtual address space, with no
explicit I/O. The last one can be used by a process to map in a file currently also
mapped in by a different process. In this way, two or more processes can share regions of their address spaces.
These API functions are the basic ones upon which the rest of the memory
management system is constructed. For example, there are API functions for

492

THE OPERATING SYSTEM MACHINE LEVEL

CHAP. 6

allocating and freeing data structures on one or more heaps. Heaps are used for
storing data structures that are dynamically created and destroyed. The heaps are
not garbage collected by the operating system, so it is up to language run-time systems or user software to free blocks of virtual memory that are no longer in use.
(Garbage collection is the automatic removal of unused data structures.) Heap
usage in Windows 7 is similar to the use of the malloc function in UNIX systems,
except that there can be multiple independently managed heaps.

6.5.3 Examples of OS-Level I/O
The heart of any operating system is providing services to user programs,
mostly I/O services such as reading and writing files. Both UNIX and Windows 7
offer a wide variety of I/O services to user programs. For most UNIX system calls,
Windows 7 has an equivalent call, but the reverse is not true, as Windows 7 has far
more calls and each is far more complicated than its UNIX counterpart.
UNIX I/O
Much of the popularity of the UNIX system can be traced directly to its simplicity, which, in turn, is a direct result of the organization of the file system. An ordinary file is a linear sequence of 8-bit bytes starting at 0 and going up to a maximum of typically 264 − 1 bytes. The operating system itself imposes no record
structure on files, although many user programs regard ASCII text files as sequences of lines, each line terminated by a line feed.
Associated with every open file is a pointer to the next byte to be read or written. The read and write system calls read and write data starting at the file position
indicated by the pointer. Both calls advance the pointer after the operation by an
amount equal to the number of bytes transferred. However, random access to files
is possible by explicitly setting the file pointer to a specific value.
In addition to ordinary files, the UNIX system also supports special files, which
are used to access I/O devices. Each I/O device typically has one or more special
files assigned to it. By reading and writing from the associated special file, a program can read or write from the I/O device. Disks, printers, terminals, and many
other devices are handled this way.
The major UNIX file system calls are listed in Fig. 6-35. The creat call (without the e) can be used to create a new file. It is not strictly necessary any more, because open can also create a new file now. Unlink removes a file, assuming that the
file is in only one directory.
Open is used to open existing files (and create new ones). The mode flag tells
how to open it (for reading, for writing, etc.). The call returns a small integer called a file descriptor that identifies the file in subsequent calls. When the file is no
longer needed, close is called to free up the file descriptor.
The actual file I/O is done with read and write, each having a file descriptor
indicating which file to use, a buffer for the data to go to or come from, and a byte

SEC. 6.5

EXAMPLE OPERATING SYSTEMS

System call

493

Meaning

creat(name, mode)

Create a file; mode specifies the protection mode

unlink(name)

Delete a file (assuming that there is only 1 link to it)

open(name, mode)

Open or create a file and return a file descriptor

close(fd)

Close a file

read(fd, buffer, count)

Read count bytes into buffer

write(fd, buffer, count) Write count bytes from buffer
lseek(fd, offset, w)

Move the file pointer as required by offset and w

stat(name, buffer)

Return information about a file

chmod(name, mode)
