Loosely coupled
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 8-1. (a) On-chip parallelism. (b) A coprocessor. (c) A multiprocessor.
(d) A multicomputer. (e) A grid.

8.1.1 Instruction-Level Parallelism
At the lowest level, one way to achieve parallelism is to issue multiple instructions per clock cycle. Multiple-issue CPUs come in two varieties: superscalar
processors and VLIW processors. We have touched on both earlier in the book,
but it may be useful to review this material here.
We have seen superscalar CPUs before (e.g., Fig. 2-5). In the most common
configuration, at a certain point in the pipeline an instruction is ready to be executed. Superscalar CPUs are capable of issuing multiple instructions to the execution units in a single clock cycle. The number of instructions actually issued
depends on both the processor design and current circumstances. The hardware
determines the maximum number that can be issued, usually two to six instructions. However, if an instruction needs a functional unit that is not available or a
result that has not yet been computed, the instruction will not be issued.
The other form of instruction-level parallelism is found in VLIW (Very Long
Instruction Word) processors. In the original form, VLIW machines indeed had
long words containing instructions that used multiple functional units. Consider,
for example, the pipeline of Fig. 8-2(a), where the machine has five functional
units and can perform two integer operations, one floating-point operation, one
load, and one store simultaneously. A VLIW instruction for this machine would
contain five opcodes and five pairs of operands, one opcode and operand pair per
functional unit. With 6 bits per opcode, 5 bits per register, and 32 bits per memory
address, instructions could easily be 134 bits—quite long indeed.

556

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

Integer

Integer

(a)

Fetch

Decode

Floating
point

Issue

Retire

Load

Store
No-op
(b)

---L-

---L-

l--L-

llF-S

l-FLS

L L lL

llFS

lIF-S

---L-

--LFS

End-of-bundle marker

VLIW instruction
(c)

l-FL-

lFLS

lFL

lIFS

L

LFS

Bundle

Figure 8-2. (a) A CPU pipeline. (b) A sequence of VLIW instructions. (c) An
