two minor exceptions) specifies a register that is tested before the operation is executed. If the low-order bit of the register is set, the operation is executed; otherwise, it is skipped. Each of the (up to) five operations is individually predicated.
An example of a predicated operation is
IF R2 IADD R4, R5 –> R8

which tests R2 and, if the low-order bit is 1, adds R4 to R5 and stores the result in
R8. An operation can be made unconditional by using R1 (which is always 1) as
the predicate register. Using R0 (which is always 0) makes it a no-op.
The TriMedia multimedia operations can be grouped into the 15 groups listed
in Fig. 8-5. Many of the operations involve clipping, which specifies an operand

560

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

and a range and forces the operand into the range, using the lowest or highest values for operands that fall outside it. Clipping can be done on 8-, 16-, or 32-bit operands. For example, when clipping is performed with a range of 0 to 255 on 40
and 340, the clipped results are 40 and 255, respectively. The clip group performs
clip operations.
Group

Description

Clip

Clip 4 bytes or 2 half words

DSP absolute value

Clipped, signed, absolute value

DSP add

Clipped signed addition

DSP subtract

Clipped signed subtraction

DSP multiply

Clipped signed multiplication

Min, max

Get minimum or maximum of four byte pairs

Compare

Bytewise compare of two registers

Shift

Shift a pair of 16-bit operands

Sum of products

Signed sum of 8- or 16-bit products

Merge, pack, swap

Byte and half word manipulation

Byte quad averages Unsigned byte-wise quad averaging
Byte averages

Unsigned byte-wise average of four elements

Byte multiplies

Unsigned 8-bit multiply

Motion estimation

Unsigned sum of absolute values of signed 8-bit diffs

Miscellaneous

Other arithmetic operations

Figure 8-5. The major groups of TriMedia custom operations.

The next four groups in Fig. 8-5 perform the indicated operation on operands
of various sizes, clipping the results into a specific range. The min, max group examines two registers and for each byte finds the smallest or largest value. Similarly, the compare group regards two registers as four pairs of bytes and compares
each pair.
Multimedia operations are rarely performed on 32-bit integers because most
images are composed of RGB pixels with 8-bit values for each of the red, green,
and blue colors. When an image is being processed (e.g., compressed), it is normally represented by three components, one for each color (RGB space) or a logically equivalent form (YUV space, discussed later in this chapter). Either way, a
lot of processing is done on rectangular arrays containing 8-bit unsigned integers.
The TriMedia has a large number of operations specifically designed for processing arrays of 8-bit unsigned integers efficiently. As a simple example, consider
the upper left-hand corner of an array of 8-bit values stored in (big-endian) memory as illustrated in Fig. 8-6(a). The 4 × 4 block shown in the corner contains 16
8-bit values labeled A through P. Suppose, for example, that the image needs to be
transposed, to produce Fig. 8-6(b). How can this task be achieved?

SEC. 8.1

561

ON-CHIP PARALELLISM
32-Bit register
