source address as the second operand. What problems would have to be solved to do it
the other way?
4. Can the following program be assembled in two passes? EQU is a pseudoinstruction
that equates the label to the expression in the operand field.
P EQU Q
Q EQU R
R EQU S
S EQU 4

5. The Dirtcheap Software Company is planning to produce an assembler for a computer
with a 48-bit word. To keep costs down, the project manager, Dr. Scrooge, has decided
to limit the length of allowed symbols so that each symbol can be stored in a single
word. Scrooge has declared that symbols may consist only of letters, except the letter
Q, which is forbidden (to demonstrate their concern for efficiency to the customers).
What is the maximum length of a symbol? Describe your encoding scheme.
6. What is the difference between an instruction and a pseudoinstruction?
7. What is the difference between the instruction location counter and the program counter, if any? After all, both keep track of the next instruction in a program.
8. Show the symbol table after the following x86 statements have been encountered. The
first statement is assigned to address 1000.
EVEREST:
K2:
WHITNEY:
MCKINLEY:
FUJI:
KIBO:

POP BX
PUSH BP
MOV BP,SP
PUSH X
PUSH SI
SUB SI,300

(1 BYTE)
(1 BYTE)
(2 BYTES)
(3 BYTES)
(1 BYTE)
(3 BYTES)

CHAP. 7

PROBLEMS

551

9. Can you envision circumstances in which an assembly language permits a label to be
the same as an opcode (e.g., MOV as a label)? Discuss.
10. Show the steps needed to look up Ann Arbor using binary search on the following list:
Ann Arbor, Berkeley, Cambridge, Eugene, Madison, New Haven, Palo Alto, Pasadena,
Santa Cruz, Stony Brook, Westwood, and Yellow Springs. When computing the middle element of a list with an even number of elements, use the element just after the
middle index.
11. Is it possible to use binary search on a table whose size is prime?
12. Compute the hash code for each of the following symbols by adding up the letters (A =
1, B = 2, etc.) and taking the result modulo the hash table size. The hash table has 19
slots, numbered 0 to 18.
els, jan, jelle, maaike
Does each symbol generate a unique hash value? If not, how can the collision problem
be dealt with?
13. The hash coding method described in the text links all the entries having the same hash
code together on a linked list. An alternative method is to have only a single n-slot table, with each table slot having room for one key and its value (or pointers to them). If
the hashing algorithm generates a slot that is already full, a second hashing algorithm
is used to try again. If that one is also full, another is used, and so on, until an empty is
found. If the fraction of the slots that are full is R, how many probes will be needed,
on the average, to enter a new symbol?
14. As technology progresses, it may one day be possible to put thousands of identical
CPUs on a chip, each CPU having a few words of local memory. If all CPUs can read
and write three shared registers, how can an associative memory be implemented?
15. The x86 has a segmented architecture, with multiple independent segments. An
assembler for this machine might well have a pseudoinstruction SEG N that would
direct the assembler to place subsequent code and data in segment N. Does this
scheme have any influence on the ILC?
16. Programs often link to multiple DLLs. Would it not be more efficient just to put all the
procedures in one big DLL and then link to it?
17. Can a DLL be mapped into two process’ virtual address spaces at different virtual addresses? If so, what problems arise? Can they be solved? If not, what can be done to
eliminate them?
18. One way to do (static) linking is as follows. Before scanning the library, the linker
builds a list of procedures needed, that is, names defined as EXTERN in the modules
being linked. Then the linker goes through the library linearly, extracting every procedure that is in the list of names needed. Does this scheme work? If not, why not and
how can it be remedied?
19. Can a register be used as the actual parameter in a macro call? How about a constant?
Why or why not?

552

THE ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE LEVEL

CHAP. 7

20. You are to implement a macro assembler. For esthetic reasons, your boss has decided
that macro definitions need not precede their calls. What implications does this decision have on the implementation?
21. Think of a way to put a macro assembler into an infinite loop.
22. A linker reads five modules, whose lengths are 200, 800, 600, 500, and 700 words, respectively. If they are loaded in that order, what are the relocation constants?
23. Write a symbol table package consisting of two routines: enter(symbol, value) and
lookup(symbol, value). The former enters new symbols in the table and the latter looks
them up. Use some form of hash coding.
24. Repeat the previous problem, only this time instead of using a hash table, after the last
symbol is entered, sort the table and use a binary-lookup algorithm to find symbols.
25. Write a simple assembler for the Mic-1 computer of Chap. 4. In addition to handling
the machine instructions, provide a facility for assigning constants to symbols at assembly time, and a way to assemble a constant into a machine word. These should be
