added to the Pentium 4, starting with the 3.06-GHz version and continuing with
faster versions of the Pentium processor, including the Core i7. Intel calls the implementation of multithreading used in its processors hyperthreading.
The basic idea is to allow two threads (or possibly processes, since the CPU
cannot tell what is a thread and what is a process) to run at once. To the operating

566

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

system, a hyperthreaded Core i7 chip looks like a dual processor in which both
CPUs happen to share a common cache and main memory. The operating system
schedules the threads independently. If two applications are running at the same
time, the operating system can run each one at the same time. For example, if a
mail daemon is sending or receiving email in the background while a user is interacting with some program in the foreground, the daemon and the user program can
be run in parallel, as though there were two CPUs available.
Application software that has been designed to run as multiple threads can use
both virtual CPUs. For example, video editing programs usually allow users to
specify certain filters to apply to each frame in some range. These filters can modify the brightness, contrast, color balance, or other properties of each frame. The
program can then assign one CPU to process the even-numbered frames and the
other to process the odd-numbered frames. The two can then run in parallel.
Since the two threads share all the hardware resources, a strategy is needed to
manage the sharing. Intel identified four useful strategies for resource sharing in
conjunction with hyperthreading: resource duplication, partitioned resources,
threshold sharing, and full sharing. We will now touch on each of these in turn.
To start with, some resources are duplicated just for threading. For example,
since each thread has its own flow of control, a second program counter had to be
added. The table that maps the architectural registers (EAX, EBX, etc.) onto the
physical registers also had to be duplicated, as did the interrupt controller, since the
threads can be independently interrupted.
Next we have partitioned resource sharing, in which the hardware resources
are rigidly divided between the threads. For example, if the CPU has a queue between two functional pipeline stages, half the slots could be dedicated to thread 1
and the other half to thread 2. Partitioning is easy to accomplish, has no overhead,
and keeps the threads out of each other’s hair. If all the resources are partitioned,
we effectively have two separate CPUs. On the down side, it can easily happen
that at some point one thread is not using some of its resources that the other one
wants but is forbidden from accessing. As a consequence, resources that could
have been used productively lie idle.
The opposite of partitioned sharing is full resource sharing. When this
scheme is used, either thread can acquire any resources it needs, first come, first
served. However, imagine a fast thread consisting primarily of additions and
subtractions and a slow thread consisting primarily of multiplications and divisions. If instructions are fetched from memory faster than multiplications and divisions can be carried out, the backlog of instructions fetched for the slow thread and
queued but not yet fed into the pipeline will grow in time.
Eventually, this backlog will occupy the entire instruction queue, bringing the
fast thread to a halt for lack of space in the instruction queue. Full resource sharing solves the problem of a resource lying idle while another thread wants it, but
creates a new problem of one thread potentially hogging so many resources that it
slows the other one down or stops it altogether.

SEC. 8.1

567

ON-CHIP PARALELLISM

An intermediate scheme is threshold sharing, in which a thread can acquire
resources dynamically (no fixed partitioning) but only up to some maximum. For
resources that are replicated, this approach allows flexibility without the danger
that one thread will starve due to its inability to acquire any of the resource. If, for
example, no thread can acquire more than 3/4 of the instruction queue, no matter
what the slow thread does, the fast thread will be able to run. The Core i7
hyperthreading uses different sharing strategies for different resources in an attempt to address the various problems alluded to above. Duplication is used for resources that each thread requires all the time, such as the program counter, register
map, and interrupt controller. Duplicating these resources increases the chip area
by only 5%, a modest price to pay for multithreading. Resources available in such
abundance that there is no danger of one thread capturing them all, such as cache
lines, are fully shared in a dynamic way. On the other hand, resources that control
the operation of the pipeline, such as the various queues within the pipeline, are
partitioned, giving each thread half of the slots. The main pipeline of the Sandy
Bridge microarchitecture used in the Core i7 is illustrated in Fig. 8-9, with the
white and gray boxes indicating how the resources are allocated between the white
and gray threads.
PC

I-cache and
Fetch
micro-op cache queue

Allocate/
renaming

Reorder Scheduler Registers Execution
buffer

D-cache

Register
write

Retirement
queue

Figure 8-9. Resource sharing between threads in the Core i7 microarchitecture.

In this figure we can see that all the queues are partitioned, with half the slots
in each queue reserved for each thread. In this one, neither thread can choke off
the other. The register allocator and renamer is also partitioned. The scheduler is
dynamically shared, but with a threshold, to prevent either thread from claiming all
of the slots. The remaining pipeline stages are fully shared.
All is not sweetness and light with multithreading, however. There is also a
downside. While partitioning is cheap, dynamic sharing of any resource, especially with a limit on how much a thread can take, requires bookkeeping at run time to
