caches with dedicated point-to-point connections. The next level of the memory
hierarchy is the shared and unified L3 data cache.
The L2 caches connect to the L3 shared cache using a ring network. When a
communication request enters the ring network, it is forwarded to the next node on
the network, where it is checked to see if it has reached its destination node. This
process continues from node to node on the ring until the destination node is found
or the request arrives at its source again (in which case the destination does not
exist). The advantage of a ring network is it is a cheap way to get high bandwidth,
at the cost of increased latency as requests hop from node to node. The Core i7
ring network serves two primary purposes. First, it provides a way to move memory and I/O requests between the caches and processors. Second, it implements the
checks necessary to ensure that each processor is always seeing a coherent view of
memory. We will learn more about these coherence checks later in this chapter.

570

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

Heterogeneous Multiprocessors on a Chip
A completely different application area calling for single-chip multiprocessors
is embedded systems, especially in audiovisual consumer electronics, such as television sets, DVD players, camcorders, game consoles, cell phones, and so on.
These systems have demanding performance requirements and tight constraints.
Although these devices look different, more and more of them are simply small
computers, with one or more CPUs, memories, I/O controllers, and some custom
I/O devices. A cell phone, for example, is merely a PC with a CPU, memory,
dwarf keyboard, microphone, loudspeaker, and a wireless network connection in a
small package.
Consider, as an example, a portable DVD player. The computer inside has to
handle the following functions:
1. Control of a cheap, unreliable servomechanism for head tracking.
2. Analog-to-digital conversion.
3. Error correction.
4. Decryption and digital rights management.
5. MPEG-2 video decompression.
6. Audio decompression.
7. Encoding the output for NTSC, PAL, or SECAM television sets.
This work must be done subject to stringent real-time, quality-of-service, energy,
heat-dissipation, size, weight, and price constraints.
CD, DVD, and Blu-ray disks contain a long spiral containing the information,
as illustrated in Fig. 2-25 (for a CD). In this section we will discuss DVDs since
they are still more common than Blu-ray disks, but Blu-ray disks are very similar
to DVDs except they use MPEG-4 instead of MPEG-2 for encoding. With all optical media, the read head must accurately track the spiral as the disk rotates. The
price is kept low by using a relatively simple mechanical design and tight control
over the head position in software. The signal coming off the head is an analog
signal, which must be converted to digital form before being processed. After it
has been digitized, heavy error correction is required because DVDs are pressed
and contain many errors, which must corrected in software. The video is compressed using the MPEG-2 international standard, which requires complex
(Fourier-transform-like) computations for decompression. Audio is compressed
using a psycho-acoustic model, which also requires sophisticated calculations for
decompression. Finally, audio and video have to be rendered in a suitable form for
output to NTSC, PAL, or SECAM television sets, depending on the country to
which the DVD player is shipped. It should come as no surprise that doing all this
work in real time in software on a cheap general-purpose CPU is not possible.

SEC. 8.1

571

ON-CHIP PARALELLISM

What is needed is a heterogeneous multiprocessor containing multiple cores, each
specialized for one particular task. An example DVD player is given in Fig. 8-12.

MPEG video decoder
Control processor

Heterogeneous
multiprocessor chip
with six cores

NTSC/PAL/SECAM
composite video
Audio
encoder
decoder
Disk controller
Cache
Memory

Bus

Figure 8-12. The logical structure of a simple DVD player contains a heterogeneous multiprocessor containing multiple cores for different functions.

The functions of the cores in Fig. 8-12 are all different, with each being carefully designed to be extremely good at what it does for the lowest possible price.
For example, DVD video is compressed using a scheme known as MPEG-2 (after
the Motion Picture Experts Group that invented it). It consists of dividing each
frame up into blocks of pixels and doing a complex transformation on each one. A
frame can consist entirely of transformed blocks or it can specify that a certain
block is the same as one found in the previous frame but located at an offset of
(Δx, Δy) from its current position except with a couple of pixels changed. Doing
this calculation in software is extremely slow, but it is possible to build an MPEG-2
decoding engine that can do it in hardware quite rapidly. Similarly, audio decoding
and reencoding the composite audio-video signal to conform to one of the world’s
television standards can be done better by dedicated hardware processors. These
observations quickly lead to heterogeneous multiprocessor chips containing multiple cores specifically designed for audio-visual applications. However, because the
control processor is a general-purpose programmable CPU, the multiprocessor
chip can also be used in other, similar applications, such as a DVD recorder.
Another device requiring a heterogeneous multiprocessor is the engine inside
an advanced cell phone. Current phones sometimes have still cameras, video cameras, game machines, web browsers, email readers, and digital satellite radio receivers, using either cell-phone technology (CDMA or GSM, depending on the
