create a miniature version of the PCI world, in which many manufacturers produce
processors and controllers that plug together easily. One difference, however, is
that in the PCI world the manufacturers produce and sell actual boards that PC
vendors and end users buy. In the CoreConnect world, third parties design cores
but do not manufacture them. Instead, they license them as intellectual property to
consumer electronics and other companies, which then design custom heterogeneous multiprocessor chips based on their own and licensed third-party cores.
Since manufacturing such large and complex chips requires a massive investment

574

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

in fabrication facilities, in most cases the consumer electronics company just does
the design, subcontracting the chip manufacturing out to a semiconductor vendor.
Cores exist for numerous CPUs (ARM, MIPS, PowerPC, etc.) as well as for
MPEG decoders, digital signal processors, and all the standard I/O controllers.
The IBM CoreConnect is not the only popular on-chip bus on the market. The
AMBA (Advanced Microcontroller Bus Architecture) is also widely used to
connect ARM CPUs to other CPUs and I/O devices (Flynn, 1997). Other, somewhat less popular on-chip buses are the VCI (Virtual Component Interconnect)
and OCP-IP (Open Core Protocol-International Partnership), which are also
competing for market share (Bhakthavatchalu et al., 2010). On-chip buses are only
the start; people are now putting complete networks on a chip (Ahmadinia and
Shahrabi, 2011).
With chip manufacturers having increasing difficulty in raising clock frequencies due to heat-dissipation problems, single-chip multiprocessors are a very hot
topic. More information can be found in Gupta et al. (2010), Herrero et al. (2010),
and Mishra et al. (2011).

8.2 COPROCESSORS
Having examined some ways of achieving on-chip parallelism, let us now
move up a step and look at how the computer can be speeded up by adding a second, specialized processor. These coprocessors come in many varieties, from
small to large. On the IBM 360 mainframes and all of their successors, independent I/O channels exist for doing input/output. Similarly, the CDC 6600 had 10 independent processors for doing I/O. Graphics and floating-point arithmetic are
other areas where coprocessors have been used. Even a DMA chip can be seen as
a coprocessor. In some cases, the CPU gives the coprocessor an instruction or set
of instructions and tells it to execute them; in other cases, the coprocessor is more
independent and runs pretty much on its own.
Physically, coprocessors can range from a separate cabinet (the 360 I/O channels) to a plug-in board (network processors) to an area on the main chip (floating-point). In all cases, what distinguishes them is the fact that some other processor is the main processor and the coprocessors are there to help it. We will now
examine three areas where speed-ups are possible: network processing, multimedia, and cryptography.

8.2.1 Network Processors
Most computers nowadays are connected to a network or to the Internet. As a
result of technological progress in network hardware, networks are now so fast that
it has become increasingly difficult to process all the incoming and outgoing data
in software. As a consequence, special network processors have been developed to

SEC. 8.2

575

COPROCESSORS

handle the traffic, and many high-end computers now have one of these processors.
In this section we will first give a brief introduction to networking and then discuss
how network processors work.
Introduction to Networking
Computer networks come in two general types: local-area networks, or
LANs, which connect multiple computers within a building or campus, and widearea networks or WANs, which connect computers spread over a large geographic
area. The most popular LAN is called Ethernet. The original Ethernet consisted
of a fat cable into which a wire coming from each computer was forcibly inserted
using what was euphemistically referred to a vampire tap. Modern Ethernets have
the computers attached to a central switch, as illustrated in the right-hand portion
of Fig. 8-14. The original Ethernet crawled along at 3 Mbps, but the first commercial version was 10 Mbps. It was eventually replaced by fast Ethernet at 100 Mbps
and then by gigabit Ethernet at 1 Gbps. A 10-gigabit Ethernet is already on the
market and a 40-gigabit Ethernet is in the pipeline.
Application provider premises
Internet

Server

Router
Firewall

Telephone line
Packet
ISP

Switch
User’s computer
Fiber-optic link

Figure 8-14. How users are connected to servers on the Internet.

WANs are organized differently. They consist of specialized computers called
routers connected by wires or optical fibers, as shown in the middle of Fig. 8-14.
Chunks of data called packets, typically 64 to about 1500 bytes, are moved from
the source machine through one or more routers until they reach their destination.
At each hop, a packet is stored in the router’s memory and then forwarded to the
next router along the path as soon as the needed transmission line is available.
This technique is called store-and-forward packet switching.
Although many people think of the Internet as a single WAN, technically it is a
collection of many WANs connected together. However, for our purposes, that distinction is not important. Figure 8-14 gives a bird’s-eye view of the Internet from
the perspective of a home user. The user’s computer is typically connected to a

576

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

