
With 512 CUDA cores, the Fermi GPU would grind to a halt without significant memory bandwidth. To provide this bandwidth, the Fermi GPU implements a
modern memory hierarchy as illustrated in Fig. 8-18. Each SM has both a dedicated shared memory and a private level 1 data cache. The dedicated shared memory

SEC. 8.2

COPROCESSORS

585

is directly addressed by the CUDA cores, and it provides fast sharing of data between threads within a single SM. The level 1 cache speeds up accesses to DRAM
data. To accommodate the wide range of program data usage, the SMs can be configured with 16-KB shared memory and 48-KB level 1 cache or 48-KB shared
memory and 16-KB level 1 cache. All SMs share a single unified 768-KB level 2
cache. The level 2 cache provides faster access to DRAM data that do not fit in the
level 1 caches. The level 2 cache also provides sharing between SMs, although this
mode of sharing is much slower than the intra-SM sharing that occurs within an
SM’s shared memory. Beyond the level 2 cache is the DRAM, which holds the remaining data, imagery, and textures used by programs running on the Fermi GPU.
Efficient programs will try to avoid accessing DRAM at all costs, as a single access can take hundreds of cycles to complete.
For a savvy programmer, the Fermi GPU represents one of the most computationally capable platforms ever created. A single Fermi-based GTX 580 GPU running at 772 MHz with 512 CUDA cores can achieve a sustained computational rate
of 1.5 teraflops while consuming 250 watts of power. This statistic is even more
impressive when one considers that the street price of a GTX 580 GPU is less than
600 U.S. dollars. By way of historical comparison, in 1990, the fastest computer
in the world, the Cray-2, had a performance of 0.002 teraflops and a price tag (in
inflation-adjusted dollars) of $30 million. It also filled a modest-sized room and
came with its own liquid-cooling system to dissipate the 150 kW of power it consumed. The GTX 580 has 750 times more horsepower for 1/50000 of the price
while consuming 1/600th as much energy. Not a bad deal.

8.2.3 Cryptoprocessors
A third area in which coprocessors are popular is security, especially network
security. When a connection is established between a client and a server, in many
cases they must first authenticate each other. Then a secure, encrypted connection
has to be established between them so data can be transferred in a secure way to
foil any snoopers who may tap the line.
The problem with security is that to achieve it, cryptography has to be used,
and cryptography is very compute intensive. Cryptography comes in two general
flavors, called symmetric key cryptography and public-key cryptography. The
former is based on mixing up the bits very thoroughly, sort of the electronic equivalent of throwing a message into an electric blender. The latter is based on multiplication and exponentiation of large (e.g., 1024-bit) numbers and is extremely
time consuming.
To handle the computation needed to encrypt data securely for transmission or
storage and then decrypt them later, various companies have produced crypto
coprocessors, sometimes as PCI bus plug-in cards. These coprocessors have special hardware that enables them to do the necessary cryptography much faster than
an ordinary CPU can do it. Unfortunately, a detailed discussion of how they work

586

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

would first require explaining quite a bit about cryptography itself, which is
beyond the scope of this book. For more information about crypto coprocessors,
see Gaspar et al. (2010), Haghighizadeh et al. (2010), and Shoufan et al. (2011).

8.3 SHARED-MEMORY MULTIPROCESSORS
We have now seen how parallelism can be added to single chips and to individual systems by adding a coprocessor. The next step is to see how multiple fullblown CPUs can be combined into larger systems. Systems with multiple CPUs
can be divided into multiprocessors and multicomputers. After taking a close look
at what these terms actually mean, we will first study multiprocessors and then
multicomputers.

8.3.1 Multiprocessors vs. Multicomputers
In any parallel computer system, CPUs working on different parts of the same
job must communicate to exchange information. Precisely how they should do this
is the subject of much debate in the architectural community. Two distinct designs,
multiprocessors and multicomputers, have been proposed and implemented. The
key difference between the two is the presence or absence of shared memory. This
difference permeates how they are designed, built, and programmed, as well as
their scale and price.
Multiprocessors
A parallel computer in which all the CPUs share a common memory is called a
multiprocessor, as indicated symbolically in Fig. 8-19. All processes working together on a multiprocessor can share a single virtual address space mapped onto
the common memory. Any process can read or write a word of memory by just executing a LOAD or STORE instruction. Nothing else is needed. The hardware does
the rest. Two processes can communicate by simply having one of them write data
to memory and having the other one read them back.
The ability for two (or more) processes to communicate by just reading and
writing memory is the reason multiprocessors are popular. It is an easy model for
programmers to understand and is applicable to a wide range of problems. Consider, for example, a program that inspects a bit-map image and lists all the objects in
it. One copy of the image is kept in memory, as shown in Fig. 8-19(b). Each of
the 16 CPUs runs a single process, which has been assigned one of the 16 sections
to analyze. Nevertheless, each process has access to the entire image, which is essential, since some objects may occupy multiple sections. If a process discovers
that one of its objects extends over a section boundary, it just follows the object

SEC. 8.3

587

SHARED-MEMORY MULTIPROCESSORS

P

P

P

P

P
P

Shared
memory
