1

1

SISD

Classical Von Neumann machine

1

Multiple

SIMD

Vector supercomputer, array processor

Multiple

1

MISD

Arguably none

Multiple

Multiple

MIMD

Multiprocessor, multicomputer

Figure 8-22. Flynn’s taxonomy of parallel computers.

Flynn’s classification is based on two concepts—instruction streams and data
streams. An instruction stream corresponds to a program counter. A system with
n CPUs has n program counters, hence n instruction streams.
A data stream consists of a set of operands. For example, in a weather-forecasting system, each of a large number of sensors might emit a stream of temperatures at regular intervals.
The instruction and data streams are, to some extent, independent, so four
combinations exist, as listed in Fig. 8-22. SISD is just the classical, sequential von
Neumann computer. It has one instruction stream, one data stream, and does one
thing at a time. SIMD machines have a single control unit that issues one instruction at a time, but they have multiple ALUs to carry it out on multiple data sets simultaneously. The ILLIAC IV (Fig. 2-7) is the prototype of SIMD machines.
Mainstream SIMD machines are increasingly rare, but conventional computers
sometimes have some SIMD instructions for processing audiovisual material. The
Core i7 SSE instructions are SIMD. Nevertheless, there is one new area in which
some of the ideas from the SIMD world are playing a role: stream processors.
† Carolus Linnaeus (1707–1778) was the Swedish biologist who devised the system now used for
classifying all plants and animals into kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species.

592

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

These machines are specifically designed to handle the demands of multimedia
rendering and may become important in the future (Kapasi et al., 2003).
MISD machines are a somewhat strange category, with multiple instructions
operating on the same piece of data. It is not clear whether any such machines
exist, although some people regard pipelined machines as MISD.
Finally, we have MIMD, which are just multiple independent CPUs operating
as part of a larger system. Most parallel processors fall into this category. Both
multiprocessors and multicomputers are MIMD machines.
Flynn’s taxonomy stops here, but we have extended it in Fig. 8-23. SIMD has
been split into two subgroups. The first one is for numeric supercomputers and
other machines that operate on vectors, performing the same operation on each
vector element. The second one is for parallel-type machines, such as the ILLIAC
IV, in which a master control unit broadcasts instructions to many independent
ALUs.
Parallel computer architectures

SISD

SIMD

MISD

(Von Neumann)
Vector
processor

MIMD

?
Array
processor

UMA

Bus

Multiprocessors

COMA

Switched

Multicomputers

NUMA
