(e)

CPU 2 writes block A

A
Modified
Bus

CPU 1

CPU 2

CPU 3
Memory

(f)

CPU 1 writes block A

A
Modified
Bus

Figure 8-28. The MESI cache coherence protocol.

SEC. 8.3

SHARED-MEMORY MULTIPROCESSORS

603

bus telling CPU 3 to please wait while it writes its line back to memory. When it is
finished, CPU 3 fetches a copy, and the line is marked as shared in both caches, as
shown in Fig. 8-28(d). After that, CPU 2 writes the line again, which invalidates
the copy in CPU 3’s cache, as shown in Fig. 8-28(e).
Finally, CPU 1 writes to a word in the line. CPU 2 sees that a write is being attempted and asserts a bus signal telling CPU 1 to please wait while it writes its line
back to memory. When it is finished, it marks its own copy as invalid, since it
knows another CPU is about to modify it. At this point we have the situation in
which a CPU is writing to an uncached line. If the write-allocate policy is in use,
the line will be loaded into the cache and marked as being in the M state, as shown
in Fig. 8-28(f). If the write-allocate policy is not in use, the write will go directly
to memory and the line will not be cached anywhere.
UMA Multiprocessors Using Crossbar Switches
Even with all possible optimizations, the use of a single bus limits the size of a
UMA multiprocessor to about 16 or 32 CPUs. To go beyond that, a different kind
of interconnection network is needed. The simplest circuit for connecting n CPUs
to k memories is the crossbar switch, shown in Fig. 8-28. Crossbar switches have
been used for decades within telephone switching exchanges to connect a group of
incoming lines to a set of outgoing lines in an arbitrary way.
At each intersection of a horizontal (incoming) and vertical (outgoing) line is a
crosspoint. A crosspoint is a small switch that can be electrically opened or
closed, depending on whether the horizontal and vertical lines are to be connected
or not. In Fig. 8-29(a) we see three crosspoints closed simultaneously, allowing
connections between the (CPU, memory) pairs (001, 000), (101, 101), and (110,
010) at the same time. Many other combinations are also possible. In fact, the
number of combinations is equal to the number of different ways eight rooks can
be safely placed on a chess board.
One of the nicest properties of the crossbar switch is that it is a nonblocking
network, meaning that no CPU is ever denied the connection it needs because
some crosspoint or line is already occupied (assuming the memory module itself is
available). Furthermore, no advance planning is needed. Even if seven arbitrary
connections are already set up, it is always possible to connect the remaining CPU
to the remaining memory. We will later see interconnection schemes that do not
have these properties.
One of the worst properties of the crossbar switch is that the number of crosspoints grows as n2 . For medium-sized systems, a crossbar design is workable. We
will discuss one such design, the Sun Fire E25K, later in this chapter. However,
with 1000 CPUs and 1000 memory modules, we need a million crosspoints. Such
a large crossbar switch is not feasible. We need something quite different.

604

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

111

110

101

100

011

010

001

000

Memories
Crosspoint
switch is open

000
001

CPUs

