Most message-passing systems provide two primitives (usually library calls),
send and receive, but several different kinds of semantics are possible. The three
main variants are
1. Synchronous message passing.
2. Buffered message passing.
3. Nonblocking message passing.
In synchronous message passing, if the sender executes a send and the receiver has not yet executed a receive, the sender is blocked (suspended) until the
receiver executes a receive, at which time the message is copied. When the sender
gets control back after the call, it knows that the message has been sent and correctly received. This method has the simplest semantics and does not require any

SEC. 8.4

MESSAGE-PASSING MULTICOMPUTERS

637

buffering. It has the severe disadvantage that the sender remains blocked until the
receiver has gotten and acknowledged receipt of the message.
In buffered message passing, when a message is sent before the receiver is
ready, the message is buffered somewhere, for example, in a mailbox, until the receiver takes it out. Thus in buffered message passing, a sender can continue after a
send, even if the receiver is busy with something else. Since the message has actually been sent, the sender is free to reuse the message buffer immediately. This
scheme reduces the time the sender has to wait. Basically, as soon as the system
has sent the message the sender can continue. However, the sender now has no
guarantee that the message was correctly received. Even if communication is reliable, the receiver may have crashed before getting the message.
In nonblocking message passing, the sender is allowed to continue immediately after making the call. All the library does is tell the operating system to
do the call later, when it has time. As a consequence, the sender is hardly blocked
at all. The disadvantage of this method is that when the sender continues after the
send, it may not reuse the message buffer as the message may not yet have been
sent. Somehow it has to find out when it can reuse the buffer. One idea is to have
it poll the system to ask. The other is to get an interrupt when the buffer is available. Neither of these makes the software any simpler.
Below we will briefly discuss a popular message-passing system available on
many multicomputers: MPI.
MPI—Message-Passing Interface
For quite a few years, the most popular communication package for multicomputers was PVM (Parallel Virtual Machine) (Geist et al., 1994, and Sunderram,
1990). In recent years it has been largely replaced by MPI (Message-Passing
Interface). MPI is much richer and more complex than PVM, with many more library calls, many more options, and many more parameters per call. The original
version of MPI, now called MPI-1, was augmented by MPI-2 in 1997. Below we
will give a very cursory introduction to MPI-1 (which contains all the basics), then
say a little about what was added in MPI-2. For more information about MPI, see
Gropp et al. (1994) and Snir et al. (1996).
MPI-1 does not deal with process creation or management, as PVM does. It is
up to the user to create processes using local system calls. Once they have been
created, they are arranged into static, unchanging process groups. It is with these
groups that MPI works.
MPI is based on four major concepts: communicators, message data types,
communication operations, and virtual topologies. A communicator is a process
group plus a context. A context is a label that identifies something, such as a phase
of execution. When messages are sent and received, the context can be used to
keep unrelated messages from interfering with one another.

638

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

Messages are typed and many data types are supported, including characters,
short, regular, and long integers, single- and double-precision floating-point numbers, and so on. It is also possible to construct other types derived from these.
MPI supports an extensive set of communication operations. The most basic
one is used to send messages as follows:
MPI Send(buffer, count, data type, destination, tag, communicator)

This call sends a buffer with count number of items of the specified data type to the
destination. The tag field labels the message so the receiver can say it only wants
to receive a message with that tag. The last field tells which process group the
destination is in (the destination field is just an index into the list of processes for
the specified group). The corresponding call for receiving a message is
MPI Recv(&buffer, count, data type, source, tag, communicator, &status)

which announces that the receiver is looking for a message of a certain type from a
certain source with a certain tag.
MPI supports four basic communication modes. Mode 1 is synchronous, in
which the sender may not begin sending until the receiver has called MPI Recv.
Mode 2 is buffered, in which this restriction does not hold. Mode 3 is standard,
which is implementation dependent and can be either synchronous or buffered.
Mode 4 is ready, in which the sender claims the receiver is available (as in synchronous), but no check is made. Each of these primitives comes in a blocking and
a nonblocking version, leading to eight primitives in all. Receiving has only two
variants: blocking and nonblocking.
MPI supports collective communication, including broadcast, scatter/gather,
total exchange, aggregation, and barrier. For all forms of collective communication, all the processes in a group must make the call and with compatible arguments. Failure to do this is an error. A typical form of collective communication
is for processes organized in a tree, in which values propagate up from the leaves
to the root, undergoing some processing at each step, for example, adding up the
values or taking the maximum.
A basic concept in MPI is the virtual topology, in which the processes can be
arranged in a tree, ring, grid, torus, or other topology by the user per application.
Such an arrangement provides a way to name communication paths and facilitates
communication.
MPI-2 adds dynamic processes, remote memory access, nonblocking collective
communication, scalable I/O support, real-time processing, and many other new
features that are beyond the scope of this book. In the scientific community, a battle raged for years between the MPI and PVM camps. The PVM side said that
PVM was easier to learn and simpler to use. The MPI side said the MPI does more
and also points out that MPI is a formal standard with a standardization committee
and an official defining document. The PVM side agreed but claimed that the lack

SEC. 8.4

639

MESSAGE-PASSING MULTICOMPUTERS

