and other areas are large scale and interdisciplinary. Solving them requires expertise, skills, knowledge, facilities, software, and data from multiple organizations,
often in different countries. Some examples are as follows:
1. Scientists developing a mission to Mars.
2. A consortium building a complex product (e.g., a dam or aircraft).
3. An international relief team coordinating aid after a natural disaster.
Some of these are long-term cooperations, others are more short term, but they all
share the common thread of requiring separate organizations with their own resources and procedures to work together to achieve a common goal.
Until recently, having different organizations, with different computers, operating systems, databases, and protocols work together to share resources and data has
been very difficult. However, the growing need for large-scale interorganizational
cooperation has led to the development of systems and technology for connecting
widely separated computers into what is called the grid. In a sense, the grid is the
next step along the axis of Fig. 8-1. It can be thought of as a very large, international, loosely coupled, heterogeneous, cluster.
The goal of the grid is to provide a technical infrastructure to allow a group of
organizations that share a common goal to form a virtual organization. This virtual organization has to be flexible, with a large and changing membership, permitting the members to work together in areas they deem appropriate, while allowing
them to maintain control over their own resources to whatever degree they wish.

SEC. 8.5

GRID COMPUTING

653

To this end, grid researchers are developing services, tools, and protocols to enable
these virtual organizations to function.
The grid is inherently multilateral with many participants who are peers. It can
be contrasted with existing computing frameworks. In the client-server model, a
transaction involves two parties: the server, who offers some service, and the client,
who wants to use the service. A typical example of the client-server model is the
Web, in which users go to Web servers to find information. The grid also differs
from peer-to-peer applications, in which pairs of individuals exchange files. Email
is a common example of a peer-to-peer application. Because the grid is different
from these models, it requires new protocols and technology.
The grid needs access to a wide variety of resources. Each resource has a specific system and organization that owns it and that decides how much of the resource to make available to the grid, during which hours, and to whom. In an
abstract sense, what the grid is about is resource access and management.
One way to model the grid is the layered hierarchy of Fig. 8-52. The fabric
layer at the bottom is the set of components from which the grid is built. It includes CPUs, disks, networks, and sensors on the hardware side, and programs and
data on the software side. These are the resources that the grid makes available in
a controlled way.
Layer

Function

Application

Applications that share managed
resources in controlled ways

Collective

Discovery, brokering, monitoring
and control of resource groups

Resource

Secure, managed access
to individual resources

Fabric

Physical resources: computers, storage,
networks, sensors, programs and data
Figure 8-52. The grid layers.

One level higher is the resource layer, which manages the individual resources. In many cases, a resource participating in the grid has a local process that
manages it and allows controlled access to it by remote users. This layer provides
a uniform interface to higher layers for inquiring about the characteristics and status of individual resources, monitoring them, and using them in a secure way.
Next is the collective layer, which handles groups of resources. One of its
functions is resource discovery, by which a user can locate available CPU cycles,
disk space, or specific data. The collective layer may maintain directories or other
databases to provide this information. It may also offer a brokering service by
which the providers and users of services are matched up, possibly allocating
scarce resources among competing users. The collective layer is also responsible

654

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

for replicating data, managing the admission of new members and resources to the
grid, accounting, and maintaining the policy databases of who can use what.
Still further up is the application layer, where the user applications reside. It
uses the lower layers to acquire credentials proving its right to use certain resources, submit usage requests, monitor the progress of these requests, deal with
failures, and notify the user of the results.
Security is the key to a successful grid. Resource owners nearly always insist
on maintaining tight control of their resources and want to determine who gets to
use them, for how long, and how much. Without good security, no organization
would make its resources available to the grid. On the other hand, if a user had to
have a login account and password on every computer he wanted to use, using the
grid would be unbearably cumbersome. Consequently, the grid has had to develop
a security model to handle these concerns.
A key characteristic of the security model is the single sign-on. The first step
in using the grid is to be authenticated and acquire a credential, a digitally signed
document specifying on whose behalf the work is to be done. Credentials can be
delegated, so that when a computation needs to create subcomputations, the child
processes can also be identified. When a credential is presented at a remote machine, it has to be mapped onto the local security mechanism. On UNIX systems,
for example, users are identified by 16-bit user IDs, but other systems have other
schemes. Finally, the grid needs mechanisms to allow access policies to be stated,
maintained, and updated.
In order to provide interoperability between different organizations and machines, standards are needed, in terms both of the services offered and of the protocols used to access them. The grid community has created an organization, the
