
13. As a simple model of a bus-based multiprocessor system without caching, suppose that
one instruction in every four references memory, and that a memory reference occupies
the bus for an entire instruction time. If the bus is busy, the requesting CPU is put into
a FIFO queue. How much faster will a 64-CPU system run than a 1-CPU system?
14. The MESI cache coherence protocol has four states. Other write-back cache coherence
protocols have only three states. Which of the four MESI states could be sacrificed,
and what would the consequences of each choice be? If you had to pick only three
states, which would you pick?
15. Are there any situations with the MESI cache coherence protocol in which a cache line
is present in the local cache but for which a bus transaction is nevertheless needed? If
so, explain.
16. Suppose that there are n CPUs on a common bus. The probability that any CPU tries
to use the bus in a given cycle is p. What is the chance that
a. The bus is idle (0 requests).
b. Exactly one request is made.
c. More than one request is made.
17. Name the major advantage and the major disadvantage of a crossbar switch.
18. How many crossbar switches does a full Sun Fire E25K have?
19. Suppose that the wire between switch 2A and switch 3B in the omega network of
Fig. 8-31 breaks. Who is cut off from whom?
20. Hot spots (heavily referenced memory locations) are clearly a major problem in multistage switching networks. Are they also a problem in bus-based systems?
21. An omega switching network connects 4096 RISC CPUs, each with a 60-nsec cycle
time, to 4096 infinitely fast memory modules. The switching elements each have a
5-nsec delay. How many delay slots are needed by a LOAD instruction?
22. Consider a machine using an omega switching network, like the one shown in
Fig. 8-31. Suppose that the program and stack for processor i are kept in memory
module i. Propose a slight change in the topology that makes a large difference in the
performance (the IBM RP3 and BBN Butterfly use this modified topology). What
disadvantage does your new topology have compared to the original?
23. In a NUMA multiprocessor, local memory references take 20 nsec and remote references 120 nsec. A certain program makes a total of N memory references during its
execution, of which 1 percent are to a page P. That page is initially remote, and it
takes C nsec to copy it locally. Under what conditions should the page be copied
locally in the absence of significant use by other processors?
24. Consider a CC-NUMA multiprocessor like that of Fig. 8-33 except with 512 nodes of
8 MB each. If the cache lines are 64 bytes, what is the percentage overhead for the directories? Does increasing the number of nodes increase the overhead, decrease the
overhead, or leave it unchanged?
25. What is the difference between NC-NUMA and CC-NUMA?
26. For each topology shown in Fig. 8-37, compute the diameter of the network.

658

PARALLEL COMPUTER ARCHITECTURES

CHAP. 8

27. For each topology shown in Fig. 8-37, determine the degree of fault tolerance each one
has, defined as the maximum number of links that can be lost without partitioning the
network in two.
28. Consider the double-torus topology of Fig. 8-37(f) but expanded to a size of k × k.
What is the diameter of the network? (Hint: Consider odd k and even k separately).
29. An interconnection network is in the form of an 8 × 8 × 8 cube. Each link has a fullduplex bandwidth of 1 GB/sec. What is the bisection bandwidth of the network?
30. Amdahl’s law limits the potential speed-up achievable on a parallel computer. Compute, as a function of f, the maximum possible speed-up as the number of CPUs approaches infinity. What are the implications of this limit for f = 0. 1?
31. Figure 8-51 shows how scaling fails with a bus but succeeds with a grid. Assuming
that each bus or link has a bandwidth b, compute the average bandwidth per CPU for
each of the four cases. Then scale each system to 64 CPUs and repeat the calculations.
What is the limit as the number of CPUs goes to infinity?
32. In the text, three variations of send were discussed: synchronous, blocking, and
nonblocking. Give a fourth method that is similar to a blocking send but has slightly
different properties. Give an advantage and a disadvantage of your method as compared to blocking send.
33. Consider a multicomputer running on a network with hardware broadcasting, such as
Ethernet. Why does the ratio of read operations (those not updating internal state variables) to write operations (those updating internal state variables) matter?

9
BIBLIOGRAPHY

This chapter is an alphabetical bibliography of all books and articles cited in
this book.
ABRAMSON, D.: ‘‘Mixing Cloud and Grid Resources for Many Task Computing,’’ Proc.

Int’l Workshop on Many Task Computing on Grids and Supercomputers, ACM, pp.
1–2, 2011.
ADAMS, M., and DULCHINOS, D.: ‘‘OpenCable,’’ IEEE Commun. Magazine, vol. 39, pp.

98–105, June 2001.
ADIGA, N.R. et al.: ‘‘An Overview of the BlueGene/L Supercomputer,’’ Proc. Supercomput-

ing 2002, ACM, pp. 1–22, 2002.
ADVE, S.V., and HILL, M.: ‘‘Weak Ordering: A New Definition,’’ Proc. 17th Ann. Int’l

Symp. on Computer Arch., ACM, pp. 2–14, 1990.
AGERWALA, T., and COCKE, J.: ‘‘High Performance Reduced Instruction Set Processors,’’

IBM T.J. Watson Research Center Technical Report RC12434, 1987.
AHMADINIA, A., and SHAHRABI, A.: ‘‘A Highly Adaptive and Efficient Router Architec-

ture for Network-on-Chip,’’ Computer J., vol. 54, pp. 1295–1307, Aug. 2011.
ALAM, S., BARRETT, R., BAST, M., FAHEY, M.R., KUEHN, J., MCCURDY, ROGERS, J.,
ROTH, P., SANKARAN, R., VETTER, J.S., WORLEY, P., and YU, W.: ‘‘Early Evaluation

of IBM BlueGene/P,’’ Proc. ACM/IEEE Conf. on Supercomputing, ACM/IEEE, 2008.
ALAMELDEEN, A.R., and WOOD, D.A.: ‘‘Adaptive Cache Compression for High-Perfor-

mance Processors,’’ Proc. 31st Ann. Int’l Symp. on Computer Arch., ACM, pp.
212–223, 2004.
659

660

BIBLIOGRAPHY
