-

-

Run until subroutine level minus 1

+

+

Run until subroutine level plus 1

/buf+6

Display data segment on label+#

d,!

/buf+6d

Display data segment on label+#

R , CTRL L

R

Refresh windows

q

q

Stop tracing, back to command shell

/D+#
/D+#

Figure C-11. The tracer commands. Each command must be followed by a carriage return (the Enter key). An empty box indicates that just a carriage return is
needed. Commands with no Address field listed above have no address. The #
symbol represents an integer offset.

The command /label is different for an instruction label and a data label. For a
data label, a line in the bottom window is filled or replaced with a set of data starting with that label. For an instruction label, it is equivalent to the g command. The
label may be followed by a plus sign and a number (indicated by # in Fig. C-11), to
obtain an offset from the label.
It is possible to set a breakpoint at an instruction. This is done with the command b, which can be optionally preceded by an instruction label, possibly with an
offset. If a line with a breakpoint is encountered during execution, the tracer stops.
To start again from a breakpoint, a return or run command is required. If the label
and the number are omitted, then the breakpoint is set at the current line. The

SEC. C.6

THE TRACER

725

breakpoint can be cleared by a breakpoint clear command, c, which can be preceded by labels and numbers, like the command b. There is a run command, r, in
which the tracer executes until either a breakpoint, an exit call, or the end of the
commands is encountered.
The tracer also keeps track of the subroutine level at which the program is running. This is shown in the window below the processor window and can also be
seen through the indication numbers in the stack window. There are three commands that are based on these levels. The − command causes the tracer to run until
the subroutine level is one less than the current level. What this command does is
execute instructions until the current subroutine is finished. The converse is the +
command, which runs the tracer until the next subroutine level is encountered. The
= command runs until the same level is encountered, and can be used to execute a
subroutine at the CALL command. If = is used, the details of the subroutine are
not shown in the tracer window. There is a related command, n, which runs until
the next line in the program is encountered. This command is especially useful
when issued as a LOOP command; execution stops exactly when the bottom of the
loop is executed.

C.7 GETTING STARTED
In this section, we will explain how to use the tools. First of all, it is necessary
to locate the software for your platform. We have precompiled versions for
Solaris, UNIX, for Linux and for Windows. The tools are located on the CD-ROM
and on the Web at www.prenhall.com/tanenbaum. Once there, click on the Companion Web Site for this book and then click on the link in the left-hand menu.
Unpack the selected zip file to a directory assembler. This directory and its subdirectories contain all the necessary material. On the CD-ROM, the main directories
are Bigendnx, LtlendNx, and MSWindos, and in each there is a subdirectory
assembler which contains the material. The three top-level directories are for BigEndian UNIX (e.g. Sun workstations), Little-Endian UNIX (e.g., Linux on PCs),
and Windows systems, respectively.
After unpacking or copying, the assembler directory should contain the following subdirectories and files: READ ME, bin, as src, trce src, examples, and exercise. The precompiled sources can be found in the bin directory but, for convenience, there is also a copy of the binaries in the examples directory.
To get a quick preview of how the system works, go to the examples directory
and type the command
t88 HlloWrld

This command corresponds to the first example in Sec. C.8.
The source code for the assembler is in the directory as src. The source code
files are in the language C, and the command make should recompile the sources.

726

ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE PROGRAMMING

APP. C

For POSIX-compliant platforms, there is a Makefile in the source directory which
does the job. For Windows, there is a batch file make.bat. It may be necessary to
move the executable files after compilation to a program directory, or to change the
PATH variable to make the assembler as88 and the tracer t88 visible from the
directories containing the assembly source codes. Alternatively, instead of typing
